The following is a conversation with Max Tagmark, his second time in the podcast.
In fact, the previous conversation was episode number one of this very podcast.
He is a physicist and artificial intelligence researcher at MIT, co founder
of the Future of Life Institute and author of Life 3.0, being human
in the age of artificial intelligence.
He's also the head of a bunch of other huge fascinating projects and has
written a lot of different things that you should definitely check out.
He has been one of the key humans who has been outspoken about long term
existential risks of AI and also its exciting possibilities and solutions
to real world problems, most recently at the intersection of AI and physics.
And also in reengineering the algorithms that divide us by controlling
the information we see and thereby creating bubbles and all other kinds
of complex social phenomena that we see today.
In general, he's one of the most passionate and brilliant people I
have the fortune of knowing.
I hope to talk to him many more times on this podcast in the future.
Quick mention of our sponsors, the Jordan Harbinger Show, Four
Sigmatic Mushroom Coffee, BetterHelp Online Therapy and ExpressVPN.
So the choice is wisdom, caffeine, sanity or privacy.
Choose wisely, my friends, and if you wish, click the sponsor links
below to get a discount at the support this podcast.
As a side note, let me say that much of the researchers in the machine
learning and artificial intelligence communities do not spend much time
thinking deeply about existential risks of AI.
Because our current algorithms are seen as useful but dumb, it's difficult
to imagine how they may become destructive to the fabric of human
civilization in the foreseeable future.
I understand this mindset, but it's very troublesome to me.
This is both a dangerous and uninspiring perspective, reminiscent of
the lobster sitting in a pot of lukewarm water that a minute ago was cold.
I feel a kinship with this lobster.
I believe that already the algorithms that drive our interaction on social
media have an intelligence and power that far outstrip the intelligence
and power of any one human being.
Now really is the time to think about this, to define the trajectory
of the interplay of technology and human beings in our society.
I think that the future of human civilization very well may be at
stake over this very question of the role of artificial intelligence
in our society.
If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it on Apple
Podcasts, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on
Twitter, Alex Friedman.
And now, here's my conversation with Max Tagmark.
So people might not know this, but you were actually episode number
one of this podcast just a couple of years ago, and now we're back.
And it so happens that a lot of exciting things happened in both physics
and artificial intelligence, both fields that you're super passionate about.
Can we try to catch up to some of the exciting things happening in artificial
intelligence, especially in the context of the way it's cracking, open the
different problems of the sciences?
Yeah, I'd love to, especially now as we start 2021 here, it's a really fun
time to think about what were the biggest breakthroughs in AI.
Not the ones necessarily the media wrote about, but they really matter.
And what does that mean for our ability to do better science?
What does it mean for our ability to do better science?
To help people around the world?
And what does it mean for new problems that they could cause if we're not
smart enough to avoid them?
So, you know, what do we learn basically from this?
Yes, absolutely.
So one of the amazing things you're part of is the AI Institute for
Artificial Intelligence and Fundamental Interactions.
What's up with this institute?
What are you working on?
What are you thinking about?
Well, the idea is something I'm very on fire with, which is basically AI
meets physics.
And, you know, it's been almost five years now since I shifted my own MIT
research from physics to machine learning.
And in the beginning, I noticed a lot of my colleagues, even though they
were polite about it, well, I kind of, what is Max doing?
What is this weird stuff?
He's lost his mind.
But then, but then gradually, I, together with some colleagues, were
able to persuade more and more of the other professors in our physics
department to get interested in this.
And now we got this amazing NSF center, so 20 million bucks for the next
five years, MIT and a bunch of neighboring universities here also.
And I noticed now those colleagues who were looking at me, funny, have
stopped asking what the point is of this, because it's becoming more clear.
And I really believe that, of course, AI can help physics a lot to do
better physics, but physics can also help AI a lot, both by building better
hardware.
My colleague, Martin Solzacic, for example, is working on an optical chip for
much faster machine learning, where the computation is done, not by moving
electrons around, but by moving photons around, dramatically less energy
use, faster, better.
We can also help AI a lot, I think, by having a different set of tools and a
different, maybe more audacious attitude.
You know, AI has, to a significant extent, been an engineering discipline,
where you're just trying to make things that work.
And being less, more interested in maybe selling them than in figuring out
exactly how they work and proving theorems about that they will always work.
Contrast that with physics, you know, when Elon Musk sends a rocket to the
International Space Station, they didn't just train with machine learning,
oh, let's fire it a little bit left, more to the left, a bit more to the right,
so that also missed, let's try here, no, you know, we figured out Newton's
laws of gravitation and other things and got a really deep fundamental
understanding, and that's what gives us such confidence in rockets.
And my vision is that in the future, all machine learning systems that
actually have impact on people's lives will be understood at a really,
really deep level, right, so we trust them, not because some sales rep told
us to, but because they've earned our trust, and really safety critical
things even prove that they will always do what we expect them to do.
That's very much the physics mindset, so it's interesting if you look at
big breakthroughs that have happened in machine learning this year, you know,
from dancing robots, you know, is pretty fantastic, not just because it's cool,
but if you just think about not that many years ago, this YouTube video at
this DARPA challenge where the MIT robot comes out of the car and face
plants, how far we've come in just a few years.
Similarly, Alpha Fold 2, you know, crushing the protein folding problem,
we can talk more about implications for medical research and stuff,
but hey, you know, that's huge progress.
You can look at the GPT3, they can spout off English texts,
which sometimes really, really blows you away.
You can look at the Google, at DeepMind's Mu Zero,
which doesn't just kick our butt and go and chest and chogi,
but also in all these Atari games, and you don't even have to teach it
the rules now.
You know, what all of those have in common is besides being powerful is
we don't fully understand how they work.
And that's fine if it's just some dancing robots,
and the worst thing that can happen is they face plant, right?
Or if they're playing Go, and the worst thing that can happen is
that they make a bad move and lose the game, right?
It's less fine if that's what's controlling your self driving car
or your nuclear power plant.
And we've seen already that even though Hollywood had all these movies
where they try to make us worry about the wrong things like machines
turning evil, the actual bad things that have happened with automation
have not been machines turning evil.
They've been caused by over trust in things we didn't understand
as well as we thought we did, right?
Even very simple automated systems like what Boeing put into the 737 Max, right?
Yes.
Killed a lot of people.
Was it that that little simple system was evil?
Of course not, but we didn't understand it
as well as we should have, right?
And we trusted without understanding.
Exactly.
And over trust.
We didn't even understand that we didn't understand, right?
The humility is really at the core of being a scientist.
I think step one, if you want to be a scientist,
is don't ever fool yourself into thinking you understand things
when you actually don't, right?
That's probably good advice for humans in general.
I think humility in general can do us good.
In science, it's so spectacular.
Why did we have the wrong theory of gravity ever from Aristotle
onward and close to Galileo's time?
Why would we believe something so dumb
as that if I throw this water bottle,
it's going to go up with constant speed
until it realizes that its natural motion is down.
It changes its mind.
Because people just kind of assumed
Aristotle was right.
He's an authority.
We understand that.
Why did we believe things like that the sun is going around the Earth?
Why did we believe that time flows at the same rate
for everyone until Einstein?
Same exact mistake over and over again.
We just weren't humble enough to acknowledge
that we actually didn't know for sure.
We assumed we knew.
So we didn't discover the truth
because we assumed there was nothing there to be discovered, right?
There was something to be discovered about the 737 Max.
And if you had been a bit more suspicious
and tested it better, we would have found it.
And it's the same thing with most harm
that's been done by automation so far, I would say.
Did you hear of a company called Night Capital?
No.
So good.
That means you didn't invest in them earlier.
They deployed this automated rating system.
Yes.
All nice and shiny.
They didn't understand it as well as they thought.
And it went about losing 10 million bucks per minute
for 44 minutes straight.
No.
Until someone presumably was like, oh, no, shut this up.
You know, was it evil?
No.
It was, again, misplaced trust,
something they didn't fully understand, right?
And there have been so many,
even when people have been killed by robots,
it's just quite rare still.
But in factory accidents,
it's in every single case been not malice,
just that the robot didn't understand that,
hey, a human is different from an auto part or whatever.
So this is where I think there's so much opportunity
for a physics approach,
where you just aim for a higher level of understanding.
And if you look at all these systems that we talked about
from reinforcement learning systems and dancing robots
to all these neural networks that power GPT3
and go playing software stuff,
they're all basically black boxes,
much like not so different from if you teach a human something,
you have no idea how their brain works, right?
Except the human brain at least has been error corrected
during many, many centuries of evolution
in a way that some of these systems have not, right?
And my MIT research is entirely focused on
demystifying this black box.
Intelligible intelligence is my slogan.
That's a good line.
Intelligible intelligence.
Yeah, it's not that we shouldn't settle for something
that seems intelligent,
but it should be intelligible
so that we actually trust it because we understand it, right?
Like, again, Elon trusts his rockets
because he understands Newton's laws
and thrusts and how everything works.
And let me tell you,
can I tell you why I'm optimistic about this?
Yes.
I think we've made a bit of a mistake
where some people still think
that somehow we're never going to understand neural networks.
And we're just going to have to learn to live with this.
It's this very powerful black box.
Basically, for those who haven't spent time
building their own,
it's super simple what happens inside.
You send in a long list of numbers,
and then you do a bunch of operations on them,
multiply by matrices, et cetera, et cetera,
and some other numbers come out.
That's the output of it.
And then there are a bunch of knobs you can tune.
And when you change them,
it affects the computation, the input output relation.
And then you just give the computer some definition of good,
and it keeps optimizing these knobs
until it performs as good as possible.
And often you go, like, wow, that's really good.
This robot can dance.
Or this machine is beating me at chest now.
And in the end, you have something,
which even though you can look inside it,
you have very little idea of how it works.
You can print out tables of all the millions of parameters in there.
Is it crystal clear now how it's working?
And of course not, right?
Many of my colleagues seem willing to settle for that.
And I'm like, no.
That's like the halfway point.
Some have even gone as far as sort of guessing
that the mystery, the inscrutability of this
is where some of the power comes from
and some sort of mysticism.
I think that's total nonsense.
I think the real power of neural networks
comes not from inscrutability,
but from differentiability.
And what I mean by that is simply that
the output changes only smoothly
if you tweak your knobs.
And then you can use all these powerful methods
we have for optimization in science.
We can just tweak them a little bit
and see, did that get better or worse?
That's the fundamental idea of machine learning,
that the machine itself can keep optimizing
until it gets better.
Suppose you wrote this algorithm instead
in Python or some other programming language.
And then what the knobs did was
they just changed random letters in your code.
Now it would just epically fail, right?
You change one thing and instead of saying print,
it says synth, syntax error.
You don't even know, was that for the better
or for the worse, right?
This to me is, this is what I believe
is the fundamental power of neural networks.
Just to clarify, the changing the different letters
in a program would not be a differentiable process.
It would make it an invalid program typically
and then you wouldn't even know
if you changed more letters,
if it would make it work again, right?
So that's the magic of neural networks,
the inscrubility.
The differentiability, that every setting
of the parameters is a program
and you can tell is it better or worse, right?
So you don't like the poetry of the mystery
of neural networks as the source of its power?
I generally like poetry, but...
Not in this case.
It's so misleading and above all,
it shortchanges us, it makes us underestimate
the good things we can accomplish
because so what we've been doing in my group
is basically step one,
train the mysterious neural network
to do something well.
And then step two, do some additional AI techniques
to see if we can now transform this black box
into something equally intelligent
that you can actually understand.
So for example, I'll give you one example
of this AI Feynman project that we just published, right?
So we took the 100 most famous
or complicated equations
from one of my favorite physics textbooks,
in fact the one that got me into physics
in the first place, the Feynman lectures on physics.
And so you have a formula, you know,
maybe it has what goes into the formula
as six different variables
and then what comes out as one.
So then you can make like a giant Excel spreadsheet
with seven columns.
You put in just random numbers for the six columns
for those six input variables
and then you calculate with the formula
the seventh column, the output.
So maybe it's like the force equals
in the last column some function of the other.
And now the task is, okay,
if I don't tell you what the formula was,
can you figure that out
from looking at my spreadsheet that I gave you?
This problem is called symbolic regression.
If I tell you that the formula
is what we call a linear formula.
So it's just that the output is
some sum of all the things
input at the time, some constants.
That's the famous easy problem we can solve.
We do it all the time in science and engineering.
But the general one,
if it's more complicated functions
with logarithms or cosines or other math,
it's a very, very hard one
and probably impossible to do fast in general
just because the number of formulas
with n symbols just grows exponentially.
Just like the number of passwords you can make
grow dramatically with length.
So we had this idea that
if you first have a neural network
that can actually approximate the formula,
you just train that even if you don't understand how it works,
that can be the first step
towards actually understanding how it works.
So that's what we do first.
And then we study that neural network now
and put in all sorts of other data
that wasn't in the original training data
and use that to discover
simplifying properties of the formula.
And that lets us break it apart
often into many simpler pieces
in a kind of divide and conquer approach.
So we were able to solve all of those 100 formulas,
discover them automatically,
plus a whole bunch of other ones.
But it's actually kind of humbling to say
that this code, which anyone who wants now
is listening to this can type pip install
AI Feynman on the computer and run it.
It can actually do what Johannes Kepler
spent four years doing when he stared at Mars data
until he was like, finally, Eureka, this is an ellipse.
This will do it automatically for you in one hour, right?
Or Max Planck.
He was looking at how much radiation comes out
at different wavelengths from a hot object
and discovered the famous black body formula.
This discovers it automatically.
I'm actually excited about
seeing if we can discover not just old formulas again,
but new formulas that no one has seen before.
And do you like this process of using kind of a neural network
to find some basic insights
and then dissecting the neural network
and gain the final so that that's in that way
you've forcing the explainability issue,
really trying to analyze the neural network
for the things it knows in order to come up
with the final beautiful simple theory
underlying the initial system that you were looking at.
I love that.
And the reason I'm so optimistic that it can be generalized
is because that's exactly what we do as human scientists.
Think of Galileo whom we mentioned, right?
I bet when he was a little kid,
if his dad threw him an apple, he would catch it.
Why?
Because he had a neural network in his brain
that he had trained to predict the parabolic orbit
of apples that are thrown under gravity.
If you throw a tennis ball to a dog,
it also has this same ability of deep learning
to figure out how the ball is going to move and catch it.
But Galileo went one step further when he got older.
He went back and was like, wait a minute.
I can write down a formula for this.
Y equals X squared, a parabola.
And he helped revolutionize physics as we know it, right?
So there was a basic neural network in there from childhood
that captured the experiences of observing
different kinds of trajectories.
And then he was able to go back in with another extra little neural network
and analyze all those experiences and be like, wait a minute.
There's a deeper rule here.
Exactly. He was able to distill out in symbolic form
what that complicated black box neural network was doing.
Not only did he, the formula he got,
ultimately become more accurate.
And similarly, this is how Newton got Newton's laws,
which is why Elon can send rockets to the space station now, right?
So it's not only more accurate, but it's also simpler, much simpler.
And it's so simple that we can actually describe it to our friends
and each other, right?
We've talked about it just in the context of physics now,
but hey, isn't this what we're doing when we're talking to each other also?
We go around with our neural networks just like dogs and cats
and chipmunks and blue jays.
And we experience things in the world.
But then we humans do this additional step on top of that,
where we then distill out certain high level knowledge
that we've extracted from this in a way that can communicate it to each other
in a symbolic form in English in this case, right?
So if we can do it and we believe that we are information processing entities,
then we should be able to make machine learning that does it also.
Well, do you think the entire thing could be learning?
Because this dissection process, like for AI Feynman,
the secondary stage feels like something like reasoning.
And the initial step feels like more like the more basic kind of differentiable learning.
Do you think the whole thing could be differentiable learning?
Do you think the whole thing could be basically neural networks on top of each other?
It's like turtles all the way down.
Could it be neural networks all the way down?
I mean, that's a really interesting question.
We know that in your case, it is neural networks all the way down
because that's all you'll have in your skull as a bunch of neurons doing their thing, right?
But if you ask the question more generally,
what algorithms are being used in your brain,
I think it's super interesting to compare.
I think we've gotten a little bit backwards historically
because we humans first discovered good old fashioned AI,
the logic based AI that we often call GOFI for good old fashioned AI.
And then more recently, we did machine learning
because it required bigger computers, so we had to discover it later.
So we think of machine learning with neural networks as the modern thing
and the logic based AI as the old fashioned thing.
But if you look at evolution on Earth, right,
it's actually been the other way around.
I would say that, for example, an eagle has a better vision system
than I have using, and dogs are just as good at casting tennis balls as I am.
All this stuff which is done by training in neural network
and not interpreting it in words, you know,
is something so many of our animal friends can do, at least as well as us, right?
What is it that we humans can do that the chipmunks and the eagles cannot?
It's more to do with this logic based stuff, right,
where we can extract out information in symbols, in language,
and now even with equations if you're a scientist, right?
So basically what happened was first we built these computers
that could multiply numbers real fast and manipulate symbols
and we felt they were pretty dumb.
And then we made neural networks that can see as well as a cat can
and do a lot of this inscrutable black box neural networks.
What we humans can do also is put the two together in a useful way.
Yes, in our own brain.
So if we ever want to get artificial general intelligence
that can do all jobs as well as humans can, right,
then that's what's going to be required to be able to combine the neural networks with symbolic.
Combine the old AI with a new AI in a good way.
We do it in our brains and there seems to be basically two strategies I see in industry now.
One scares the heebie jeebies out of me and the other one I find much more encouraging.
Can we break them apart? Which other two?
The one that scares the heebie jeebies out of me is this attitude
that we're just going to make ever bigger systems that we still don't understand
until they can be as smart as humans.
What could possibly go wrong?
I think it's just such a reckless thing to do and unfortunately,
and if we actually succeed as a species to build artificial general intelligence,
then we still have no clue how it works.
I think at least 50% chance we're going to be extinct before too long.
It's just going to be an utter epic own goal.
Plus that 44 minute losing money problem or like the paperclip problem
where we don't understand how it works and it's just in a matter of seconds runs away
in some kind of direction that's going to be very problematic.
Even long before you have to worry about the machines themselves
somehow deciding to do things and to us that we have to worry about people using machines.
They're short of AI, AGI and power to do bad things.
I mean, just take a moment and if anyone who's not worried particularly about advanced AI,
just take 10 seconds and just think about your least favorite leader on the planet right now.
Don't tell me who it is.
I want to keep this apolitical.
But just see the face in front of you, that person for 10 seconds.
Now imagine that that person has this incredibly powerful AI under their control
and can use it to impose their will on the whole planet.
How does that make you feel?
Yeah.
Can we break that apart just briefly?
For the 50% chance that we'll run into trouble with this approach,
do you see the bigger worry in that leader or humans using the system to do damage
or are you more worried and I think I'm in this camp
more worried about accidental unintentional destruction of everything.
So humans trying to do good and in a way where everyone agrees it's kind of good,
it's just they're trying to do good without understanding.
Because I think every evil leader in history thought they're, to some degree,
thought they're trying to do good.
Oh yeah.
I'm sure Hitler thought he was doing a good job.
I've been reading a lot about Stalin.
He legitimately thought that communism was good for the world
and that he was doing good.
I think Mao Zedong thought what he was doing with a great leap forward was good too.
I'm actually concerned about both of those.
Before, I promised to answer this in detail, but before we do that,
let me finish answering the first question,
because I told you that there were two different routes
we could get to artificial general intelligence and one scares the FPGVs out of me,
which is this one where we build something,
we just say bigger neural networks, ever more hardware,
and it's just trying to get more data and poof, now it's very powerful.
That, I think, is the most unsafe and reckless approach.
The alternative to that is the intelligible intelligence approach instead,
where we say neural networks is just a tool for the first step to get the intuition,
but then we're going to spend also serious resources on other AI techniques
for demystifying this black box and figuring out what it's actually doing
so we can convert it into something that's equally intelligent,
but that we actually understand what it's doing.
Maybe we can even prove theorems about it,
that this car here will never be hacked when it's driving,
because here is a proof.
There is a whole science of this, but it doesn't work for neural networks.
There are big black boxes, but it works well and certain other kinds of codes.
That approach, I think, is much more promising.
That's exactly why I'm working on it, frankly,
not just because I think it's cool for science,
but because I think the more we understand these systems,
the better the chances that we can make them do the things that are good for us
that are actually intended, not unintended.
You think it's possible to prove things about something as complicated as a neural network?
That's the hope?
Well, ideally, there's no reason there has to be a neural network in the end, either.
We discovered that Newton's laws of gravity with neural network in Newton's head,
but that's not the way it's programmed into the navigation system of Elon Musk's rocket anymore.
It's written in C++, or I don't know what language he uses exactly.
And then there are software tools called symbolic verification.
DARPA and the US military has done a lot of really great research on this,
because they really want to understand that when they build weapon systems,
they don't just go fire at random or malfunction, right?
And there's even a whole operating system called Cell 3 that's been developed by a DARPA grant
where you can actually mathematically prove that this thing can never be hacked.
Well, one day, I hope that will be something you can say about the OS that's running on our laptops, too,
as you know, but we're not there.
But I think we should be ambitious, frankly.
And if we can use machine learning to help do the proofs and so on as well, right,
then it's much easier to verify that a proof is correct than to come up with a proof in the first place.
That's really the core idea here.
If someone comes on your podcast and says they proved the Riemann hypothesis
or some sensational new theorem, it's much easier for someone else to take some smart math grad students
and check, oh, there's an error here on equation 5, or this really checks out
than it was to discover the proof.
Yeah, although some of those proofs are pretty complicated, but yes, it's still nevertheless much easier to verify the proof.
I love the optimism.
You know, even with the security of systems, there's a kind of cynicism that pervades people who think about this,
which is like, oh, it's hopeless.
I mean, in the same sense, exactly like you're saying when you own networks,
oh, it's hopeless to understand what's happening.
With security, people are just like, well, there's always going to be attack vectors
and waste to attack the system.
But you're right, we're just very new with these computational systems.
We're even new with these intelligence systems, and it's not out of the realm of possibility.
Just like people that understand the movement of the stars and the planets and so on.
Yeah.
It's entirely possible that within, hopefully soon, but it could be within 100 years,
we start to have an obvious laws of gravity about intelligence.
Yeah.
And God forbid, well, consciousness too, that one.
Agreed.
You know, I think, of course, if you're selling computers that get hacked a lot,
that's in your interest as a company that people think it's impossible to make it safe.
So, you know, but he's going to get the idea of suing you.
But I want to really inject optimism here.
It's absolutely possible to do much better than we're doing now.
And you know, your laptop does so much stuff.
You don't need the music player to be super safe in your future self driving car, right?
If someone hacks it and starts playing music, you don't like the world on end.
But what you can do is you can break out and say the drive computer that controls your safety
must be completely physically decoupled entirely from the entertainment system.
And it must physically be such that it can't take on over the air updates while you're driving.
And it can be, it can have, it's not that, it can have ultimately some operating system on it,
which is symbolically verified and proven that it's always going to do what it's supposed to do, right?
We can basically have, and companies should take that attitude too.
They should look at everything they do and say, what are the few systems in our company
that threaten the whole life of the company if they get hacked, you know,
and have the highest standards for them, and then they can save money
by going for the El Chippo poorly understood stuff for the rest, you know.
This is very feasible, I think.
And coming back to the bigger question about, that you worried about,
that there'll be unintentional failures, I think, there are two quite separate risks here, right?
We talked a lot about one of them, which is that the goals are noble of the human.
The human says, I want this airplane to not crash,
because this is not Muhammad Atta now flying the airplane, right?
And now there's this technical challenge of making sure that the autopilot
is actually going to behave as the pilot wants.
If you set that aside, there's also the separate question.
How do you make sure that the goals of the pilot are actually aligned with the goals of the passenger?
How do you make sure very much more broadly that if we can all agree as a species
that we would like things to kind of go well for humanity as a whole,
that the goals are aligned here, the alignment problem.
And yeah, there's been a lot of progress in the sense that there's suddenly huge amounts of research going on about it.
I'm very grateful to Elon Musk for giving us that money five years ago,
so we could launch the first research program on technical AI safety and alignment.
There's a lot of stuff happening.
I think we need to do more than just make sure little machines do always what their owners do.
That wouldn't have prevented September 11.
Muhammad Atta said, OK, autopilot, please fly into World Trade Center.
And it's like, OK, that even happened.
In a different situation, there was this depressed pilot named Andreas Lubitz,
who told his German wings passenger jet to fly into the Alps.
He just told the computer to change the altitude to 100 meters or something like that.
And you know what the computer said?
OK.
And it had the frigging topographical map of the Alps in there.
It had GPS, everything.
No one had bothered teaching it even the basic kindergarten ethics of, like, no.
We never want airplanes to fly into mountains under any circumstances.
And so we have to think beyond just the technical issues
and think about how do we align, in general, incentives on this planet for the greater good.
So starting with simple stuff like that, every airplane that has a computer in it
should be taught whatever kindergarten ethics it's smart enough to understand.
Like, no, don't fly into fixed objects if the pilot tells you to do so.
And then go on autopilot mode, send an email to the cops
and land at the latest airport, nearest airport.
Any car with a forward facing camera should just be programmed by the manufacturers
so that it will never accelerate into a human ever.
That would avoid things like the niece attack
and many horrible terrorist vehicle attacks where they deliberately did that, right?
There's not some sort of thing, oh, you know, US and China, different views.
No, there was not a single car manufacturer in the world who wanted the cars to do this.
They just hadn't thought to do the alignment.
And if you look at, more broadly, problems that happen on this planet,
the vast majority have to do a poor alignment.
I mean, think about, let's go back really big, because I know you're so good at that.
So long ago in evolution, we had these genes and they wanted to make copies of themselves.
That's really all they cared about.
So some genes said, hey, I'm going to build a brain on this body I'm in
so that I can get better at making copies to myself.
And then they decided for their benefit to get copied more,
to align your brain's incentives with their incentives.
So it didn't want you to starve to death.
So it gave you an incentive to eat.
And it wanted you to make copies of the genes.
So it gave you an incentive to fall in love and do all sorts of naughty things
to make copies of itself, right?
So that was successful value alignment done on the genes.
They created something more intelligent than themselves,
but they made sure to try to align the values.
But then something went a little bit wrong against the idea of what the genes wanted
because a lot of humans discovered, hey, we really like this business about sex
that the genes have made us enjoy, but we don't want to have babies right now.
So we're going to hack the genes and use birth control.
And I really feel like drinking a Coca Cola right now,
but I don't want to get a potbelly, so I'm going to drink Diet Coke.
We have all these things we've figured out because we're smarter than the genes,
how we can actually subvert their intentions.
So it's not surprising that we humans now, when we're in the role of these genes,
creating other nonhuman entities with a lot of power have to face the same exact challenge.
How do we make other powerful entities have incentives that are aligned with ours
so they won't hack them?
Corporations, for example, right?
We humans decided to create corporations because it can benefit us greatly.
Now all of a sudden there's a supermarket. I can go buy food there.
I don't have to hunt. Awesome.
And then to make sure that this corporation would do things that were good for us
and not bad for us, we created institutions to keep them in check.
Like if the local supermarket sells poisonous food,
then the owners of the supermarket have to spend some years reflecting behind bars, right?
So we created incentives to get to align them.
But of course, just like we were able to see through this thing,
well, birth control, if you're a powerful corporation,
you also have an incentive to try to hack the institutions that are supposed to govern you
because you ultimately as a corporation have an incentive to maximize your profit.
Just like you have an incentive to maximize the enjoyment your brain has, not for your genes.
So if they can figure out a way of bribing regulators, then they're going to do that.
In the US, we kind of caught on to that and made laws against corruption and bribery.
Then in the late 1800s, Teddy Roosevelt realized that,
no, we were still being kind of hacked because the Massachusetts railroad companies had like a bigger budget
than the state of Massachusetts and they were doing a lot of very corrupt stuff.
So he did the whole trust busting thing to try to align these other nonhuman entities,
the companies, again, more with the incentives of Americans as a whole.
It's not surprising though that this is a battle you have to keep fighting.
Now we have even larger companies than we ever had before.
And of course, they're going to try to, again, subvert the institutions.
Not because, you know, I think people make a mistake of getting all too black thinking about things in terms of good and evil.
Like arguing about whether corporations are good or evil or whether robots are good or evil.
A robot isn't good or evil. It's tool.
And you can use it for great things like robotic surgery or for bad things.
And a corporation also is a tool, of course.
And if you have good incentives to the corporation, it'll do great things like start a hospital or a grocery store.
If you have really bad incentives, then it's going to start maybe marketing addictive drugs to people and you'll have an opioid epidemic.
It's all about, we should not make a mistake of getting into some sort of fairytale, good, evil thing about corporations or robots.
We should focus on putting the right incentives in place.
My optimistic vision is that if we can do that, then we can really get good things.
We're not doing so great with that right now, either on AI, I think, or on other intelligent, nonhuman entities like big companies.
We just have a new secretary of defense.
There's going to start up now in the Biden administration who was an active member of the board of Raytheon.
I have nothing against Raytheon.
I'm not a pacifist, but there's an obvious conflict of interest if someone is in the job where they decide who they're going to contract with.
I think somehow we have, maybe we need another Teddy Roosevelt to come along again and say, hey, we want what's good for all Americans.
We need to go do some serious realigning again of the incentives that we're giving to these big companies.
Then we're going to be better off.
Naturally, with human beings, just like you beautifully described the history of this whole thing, it all started with the genes and they're probably pretty upset by all the unintended consequences that happened since.
It seems that it kind of works out.
It's in this collective intelligence that emerges at the different levels.
It seems to find, sometimes last minute, a way to realign the values or keep the values aligned.
It finds a way.
Different leaders, different humans pop up all over the place that reset the system.
Do you have an explanation why that is?
Or is that just survivor bias?
Also, is that somehow fundamentally different than with the AI systems where you're no longer dealing with something that was a direct, maybe companies are the same, a direct byproduct of the evolutionary process?
I think there is one thing which has changed.
That's why I'm not all optimistic. That's why I think there's about a 50% chance if we take the dumb route with artificial intelligence that humanity will be extinct in this century.
First, just the big picture.
Companies need to have the right incentives.
Even governments, right?
We used to have governments, usually there were just some king who was the king because his dad was the king.
Then there were some benefits of having this powerful kingdom or empire of any sort because then it could prevent a lot of local squabbles.
So at least everybody in that region would stop warring against each other.
Their incentives of different cities in the kingdom became more aligned.
That was the whole selling point.
Harari.
Harari has a beautiful piece on how empires were collaboration enablers.
Harari has invented money for that reason so we could have better alignment and trade even with people we didn't know.
This sort of stuff has been playing out since time immemorial.
What's changed is that it happens on ever larger scales.
Technology keeps getting better because science gets better.
So now we can communicate over larger distances, transport things faster over larger distances.
So the entities get ever bigger but our planet is not getting bigger anymore.
So in the past, you could have one experiment that just totally screwed up like Easter Island where they actually managed to have such poor alignment that when they went extinct, people there, there was no one else to come back and replace them.
If Elon Musk doesn't get us to Mars and then we go extinct on a global scale, then we're not coming back.
That's the fundamental difference.
And that's a mistake I would rather we don't make for that reason.
In the past, of course, history is full of fiascos, but it was never the whole planet.
And then, okay, now there's this nice uninhabited land here.
Some other people could move in and organize things better.
This is different.
The second thing which is also different is that technology gives us so much more empowerment both to do good things and also to screw up.
In the Stone Age, even if you had someone whose goals were really poorly aligned,
maybe he was really pissed off because his Stone Age girlfriend dumped him and he just wanted to kill as many people as he could.
How many could he really take out with a rock and a stick before he was overpowered?
Right, just handful, right?
Now, with today's technology, if we have an accidental nuclear war between Russia and the US,
which we almost have about a dozen times and then we have a nuclear winter,
it could take out 7 billion people or 6 billion people, we don't know.
So the scale of damage is bigger that we can do.
And if there's obviously no law of physics that says that technology will never get powerful enough that we could wipe out our species entirely,
that would just be fantasy to think that science is somehow doomed not to get more powerful than that, right?
And it's not at all unfeasible in our lifetime that someone could design a designer pandemic which spreads as easily as COVID,
but just basically kills everybody.
We already had smallpox, it killed one third of everybody who got it.
What do you think of the, here's an intuition, maybe it's completely naive and this optimistic intuition I have,
which it seems, and maybe it's a biased experience that I have,
but it seems like the most brilliant people I've met in my life all are really fundamentally good human beings.
And not like naive, good, like they really want to do good for the world in a way that well maybe is aligned to my sense of what good means.
And so I have a sense that the people that will be defining the very cutting edge of technology,
there will be much more of the ones that are doing good versus the ones that are doing evil.
So the race, I'm optimistic on us always like last minute coming up with a solution.
So if there's an engineered pandemic that has the capability to destroy most of the human civilization,
it feels like to me either leading up to that before or as it's going on,
there will be, we're able to rally the collective genius of the human species.
I could tell by your smile that you're at least some percentage doubtful,
but could that be a fundamental law of human nature that evolution only creates,
like karma is beneficial, good is beneficial and therefore will be alright?
I hope you're right.
I would really love it if you're right,
if there's some sort of law of nature that says that we always get lucky in the last second
because of karma, but I prefer not playing it so close and gambling on that.
And I think, in fact, I think it can be dangerous to have too strong faith in that
because it makes us complacent.
Like if someone tells you you never have to worry about your house burning down,
then you're not going to put in a smoke detector because why would you need to, right?
Even if it's sometimes very simple precautions, we don't take them.
If you're like, oh, the government is going to take care of everything for us.
I can always trust my politicians.
We abdicate our own responsibility.
I think it's a healthier attitude to say, yeah, maybe things will work out,
but maybe I'm actually going to have to myself step up and take responsibility.
And the stakes are so huge.
I mean, if we do this right, we can develop all this ever more powerful technology
and cure all diseases and create a future where humanity is healthy and wealthy
or not just the next election cycle, but like billions of years throughout our universe.
That's really worth working hard for and not just, you know, sitting and hoping
for some sort of fairytale karma.
Well, I just mean, so you're absolutely right.
From the perspective of the individual, like for me,
like the primary thing should be to take responsibility
and to build the solutions that your skill set allows to build.
Which is a lot.
I think we underestimate often very much how much good we can do.
If you or anyone listening to this is completely confident that our government
would do a perfect job on handling any future crisis with engineered pandemics
or future AI.
The one or two people out there.
On what actually happened in 2020.
Do you feel that government by and large around the world is handled flawlessly?
That's a really sad and disappointing reality that hopefully is a wake up call for everybody.
For the scientists, for the engineers, for the researchers and AI especially.
It was disappointing to see how inefficient we were at collecting the right amount of data
in a privacy preserving way and spreading that data
and utilizing that data to make decisions, all that kind of stuff.
I think when something bad happens to me, I made myself a promise many years ago
that I would not be a whiner.
So when something bad happens to me, of course it's just a process of disappointment.
But then I try to focus on what did I learn from this
that can make me a better person in the future.
And there's usually something to be learned when I fail.
And I think we should all ask ourselves, what can we learn from the pandemic
about how we can do better in the future?
And you mentioned there's a really good lesson.
We were not as resilient as we thought we were.
And we were not as prepared maybe as we wish we were.
You can even see very stark contrast around the planet.
South Korea, they have over 50 million people.
Do you know how many deaths they have from COVID last time I checked?
It's about 500.
Why is that?
Well, the short answer is that they had prepared.
They were incredibly quick, incredibly quick to get on it
with very rapid testing and contact tracing and so on,
which is why they never had more cases than they could contract trace effectively, right?
They even had to have the kind of big lockdowns we had in the West.
But the deeper answer to it's not just Koreans are just somehow better people.
The reason I think they were better prepared was because they had already had a pretty bad hit
from the SARS pandemic, which never became a pandemic.
Something like 17 years ago, I think.
So it was kind of a fresh memory that we need to be prepared for pandemics.
So they were, right?
So maybe this is a lesson here for all of us to draw from COVID
that rather than just wait for the next pandemic or the next problem
with AI getting out of control or anything else,
maybe we should just actually set aside a tiny fraction of our GDP
to have people very systematically do some horizon scanning
and say, okay, what are the things that could go wrong?
And let's do get out and see which are the more likely ones
and which are the ones that are actually actionable and then be prepared.
So one of the observations as one little ant slash human that I am of disappointment
is the political division over information that has been observed that I observed this year
that it seemed the discussion was less about sort of what happened
and understanding what happened deeply and more about there's different truths out there.
And it's like an argument, my truth is better than your truth.
And it's like red versus blue or different.
It was like this ridiculous discourse that doesn't seem to get at any kind of notion of the truth.
It's not like there's some kind of scientific process.
Even science got politicized in ways that's very heartbreaking to me.
You have an exciting project on the AI front of trying to rethink one of the mentioned corporations.
There's one of the other collective intelligence systems that have emerged
from this is social networks and just the spread of information on the internet,
our ability to share that information.
There's all different kinds of news sources and so on.
And so you said like that's from first principles.
Let's rethink how we think about the news, how we think about information.
Can you talk about this amazing effort that you're undertaking?
Oh, I'd love to.
But this has been my big COVID project has been nights and weekends on ever since the lockdown.
To segue into this, actually, let me come back to what you said earlier,
that you had this hope that in your experience, people who you felt were very talented,
often idealistic and wanted to do good.
Frankly, I feel the same about all people by and large.
There are always exceptions, but I think the vast majority of everybody,
regardless of education and whatnot, really are fundamentally good, right?
So how can it be that people still do so much nasty stuff?
I think it has everything to do with the information that we're given.
If you go into Sweden 500 years ago and you start telling all the farmers that those Danes in Denmark,
they're so terrible people and we have to invade them because they've done all these terrible things
that you can't fact check yourself.
A lot of people in Sweden did that.
And we've seen so much of this today in the world, both geopolitically,
where we are told that China is bad and Russia is bad and Venezuela is bad
and people in those countries are often told that we are bad.
And we also see it at a micro level, where people are told that,
oh, those who voted for the other party are bad people.
It's not just an intellectual disagreement, but they're bad people
and we're getting ever more divided.
And so how do you reconcile this with intrinsic goodness in people?
I think it's pretty obvious that it has again to do with this,
with information that we're fed and given, right?
We evolved to live in small groups where you might know 30 people in total, right?
So you then had a system that was quite good for assessing who you could trust
and who you could not.
And if someone told you that Joe there is a jerk,
but you had interacted with him yourself and seen him in action,
you would quickly realize maybe that that's actually not quite accurate, right?
But now that most people on the planet are people we've never met,
it's very important that we have a way of trusting information we're given.
So, okay, so where does the news project come in?
Well, throughout history, you can go read Machiavelli from the 1400s
and you'll see how already then there were busy manipulating people with propaganda and stuff.
Propaganda is not new at all.
And the incentives to manipulate people is just not new at all.
What is it that's new?
What's new is machine learning meets propaganda.
That's what's new.
That's why this has gotten so much worse.
Some people like to blame certain individuals like in my liberal university bubble,
many people blame Donald Trump and say it was his fault.
I see it differently.
I think Donald Trump just had this extreme skill at playing this game
in the machine learning algorithm age.
A game he couldn't have played 10 years ago.
So what's changed?
What's changed is, well, Facebook and Google and other companies.
I'm not a bad man, I think them.
I have a lot of friends who work for these companies, good people.
They deployed machine learning algorithms just to increase their profit a little bit
to just maximize the time people spent watching ads.
And they had totally underestimated how effective they were going to be.
This was, again, the black box, non intelligible intelligence.
They just noticed, oh, we're getting more ad revenue, great.
It took a long time until even realize why and how damaging this was for society.
Because, of course, what the machine learning figured out was
that the by far most effective way of gluing you to your little rectangle
was to show you things that triggered strong emotions, anger, et cetera, resentment.
And if it was true or not, it didn't really matter.
It was also easier to find stories that weren't true.
If you weren't limited, that's just a limitation to show people.
That's a very limiting fact.
And before long, we got these amazing filter bubbles on a scale we had never seen before.
A couple of this to the fact that also the online news media were so effective
that they killed a lot of print journalism.
There's less than half as many journalists now in America, I believe,
as there was a generation ago.
He just couldn't compete with the online advertising.
So, all of a sudden, most people are not getting even reading newspapers.
They get their news from social media.
And most people only get news in their little bubble.
So, along comes now some people like Donald Trump who figured out
among the first successful politicians to figure out how to really play this new game
and become very, very influential.
But I think Donald Trump took advantage of it.
He didn't create the fundamental conditions were created by machine learning
taking over the news media.
So, this is what motivated my little COVID project here.
I said before, machine learning and tech in general is not evil,
but it's also not good.
It's just a tool that you can use for good things or bad things.
And as it happens, machine learning and news was mainly used by the big players,
big tech, to manipulate people and to watch as many ads as possible,
which had this unintended consequence of really screwing up our democracy
and fragmenting it into filter bubbles.
So, I thought, well, machine learning algorithms are basically free.
They can run on your smartphone for free also if someone gives them away to you, right?
There's no reason why they only have to help the big guy to manipulate the little guy.
They can just as well help the little guy to see through all the manipulation attempts
from the big guy.
So, did this project, you can go to improvethenews.org.
The first thing we've built is this little news aggregator.
Looks a bit like Google News except it has these sliders on it
to help you break out of your filter bubble.
So, if you're reading, you can click click and go to your favorite topic.
And then, if you just slide the left right slider all the way over to the left.
There's two sliders, right?
Yeah.
There's the one, the most obvious one is the one that has left to right labeled on us.
You go to left, you get one set of articles, you go to the right,
you see a very different truth appearing.
Well, that's literally left and right on the political spectrum.
Yeah, so if you're reading about immigration, for example, it's very, very noticeable.
And I think step one, always if you want to not get manipulated,
it's just to be able to recognize the techniques people use.
So, it's very helpful to just see how they spin things on the two sides.
I think many people are under the misconception that the main problem is fake news.
It's not.
I had an amazing team of MIT students where we did an academic project,
used machine learning to detect the main kinds of bias over the summer.
Yes, of course, sometimes there's fake news where someone just claims something that's false, right?
Like, oh, Hillary Clinton just got divorced or something.
Yes.
But what we see much more of is actually just omissions.
If you go to, there's some stories which just won't be mentioned by the left or the right
because it doesn't suit their agenda.
And then they also mentioned other ones very, very, very much.
So, for example, we've had a number of stories about the Trump family's financial dealings.
And then there's been a bunch of stories about the Biden family's, Hunter Biden's financial dealings, right?
Surprise, surprise, they don't get equal coverage on the left and the right.
One side loves to cover the Biden, Hunter Biden's stuff.
And one side loves to cover the Trump, you can never guess which is which, right?
But the great news is if you're a normal American citizen and you dislike corruption in all its forms,
then slide, slide, you can just look at both sides and you'll see all those political corruption stories.
It's really liberating to just take in the both sides, the spin on both sides.
It somehow unlocks your mind to think on your own, to realize that, I don't know,
it's the same thing that was useful in the Soviet Union times for when everybody was much more aware that they're surrounded by propaganda.
That is so interesting what you're saying, actually.
So, Noam Chomsky used to be our MIT colleague once said that propaganda is to democracy.
What violence is to totalitarianism.
And what he means by that is if you have a really totalitarian government, you don't need propaganda.
People will do what you want them to do anyway out of fear, right?
But otherwise, you need propaganda.
So, I would say actually that the propaganda is much higher quality in democracies, much more believable.
And it's really striking when I talk to colleagues, science colleagues like from Russia and China and so on,
I notice they are actually much more aware of the propaganda in their own media
than many of my American colleagues are about the propaganda in Western media.
That's brilliant. That means the propaganda in the Western media is just better.
Yes, that's so brilliant.
Even the propaganda.
But once you realize that, you realize there's also something very optimistic there that you can do about it, right?
Because, first of all, omissions.
As long as there's no outright censorship, you can just look at both sides
and pretty quickly piece together a much more accurate idea of what's actually going on, right?
And develop a natural skepticism too.
Just an analytical scientific mind about what you're taking information from.
And I think, I have to say, sometimes I feel that some of us in the academic bubble are too arrogant about this
and somehow think, oh, it's just people who aren't as educated as us for a fool.
When we are often just as gullible also, we read only our media and don't see through things.
Anyone who looks at both sides like this in comparison will immediately start noticing the shenanigans being pulled at.
And I think what I try to do with this app is that big tech has to some extent tried to blame the individual
for being manipulated much like big tobacco tried to blame the individuals entirely for smoking.
And later on, our government stepped up and said, actually, you can't just blame little kids for starting to smoke.
You have to have more responsible advertising and this and that.
I think it's a bit the same here. It's very convenient for a big tech to blame.
So it's just people who are so dumb and get fooled.
The blame usually comes in saying, oh, it's just human psychology.
People just want to hear what they already believe.
But Professor David Rand at MIT actually partly debunked that with a really nice study showing that people tend to be interested
in hearing things that go against what they believe if it's presented in a respectful way.
Suppose, for example, that you have a company and you're just about to launch this project and you're convinced it's going to work.
And someone says, you know, Lex, I hate to tell you this, but this is going to fail.
And here's why. Would you be like, shut up. I don't want to hear it.
Would you? You would be interested, right?
And also, if you're on an airplane back in the pre COVID times, you know,
and the guy next to you is clearly from the opposite side of the political spectrum,
but is very respectful and polite to you.
Wouldn't you be kind of interested to hear a bit about how he or she thinks about things?
Of course.
But it's not so easy to find out respectful disagreement now,
because like, for example, if you are a Democrat and you're like, oh, I want to see something on the other side.
So you just go bright bar.com.
And then after the first 10 seconds, you feel deeply insulted by something.
It's not going to work.
Or if you take someone who votes Republican and they go to something on the left and they just get very offended very quickly
by them having put a deliberately ugly picture of Donald Trump on the front page or something, it doesn't really work.
So this news aggregator also has a nuanced slider, which you can pull to the right.
And then to make it easier to get exposed to actually more sort of academic style or more respectful portrayals of different views.
And finally, the one kind of bias I think people are mostly aware of is the left right,
because it's so obvious because both left and right are very powerful here, right?
Both of them have well funded TV stations and newspapers and it's kind of hard to miss.
But there's another one, the establishment slider, which is also really fun.
I love to play with it.
And that's more about corruption.
Because if you have a society where almost all the powerful entities want you to believe a certain thing,
that's what you're going to read in both the big mainstream media on the left and on the right, of course.
And powerful companies can push back very hard.
Like tobacco companies push back very hard back in the day when some newspaper started writing articles about tobacco being dangerous.
So it was hard to get a lot of coverage about it initially.
And also if you look geopolitically, right?
Of course, in any country when you read their media, you're mainly going to be reading a lot about articles about how our country is the good guy
and the other countries are the bad guys, right?
So if you want to have a really more nuanced understanding, you know, like the Germans used to be told that the British used to be told that the French were the bad guys
and the French used to be told that the British were the bad guys.
Now they visit each other's countries a lot and have a much more nuanced understanding.
I don't think there's going to be any more wars between France and Germany.
On the geopolitical scale, it's just as much as ever, you know, big Cold War now, US, China, and so on.
And if you want to get a more nuanced understanding of what's happening geopolitically, then it's really fun to look at this establishment slider
because it turns out there are tons of little newspapers, both on the left and on the right, who sometimes challenge establishment
and say, you know, maybe we shouldn't actually invade Iraq right now.
Maybe this weapons and mass destruction thing is BS.
If you look at journalism research afterwards, you can actually see that.
Clearly, both CNN and Fox were very pro.
Let's get rid of Saddam.
There are weapons and mass destruction.
Then there were a lot of smaller newspapers.
They were like, wait a minute, this evidence seems a bit sketchy and maybe we...
But of course, they were so hard to find.
Most people didn't even know they existed, right?
Yet, it would have been better for American national security if those voices had also come up.
I think it harmed America's national security, actually, that we invaded Iraq.
And arguably, there's a lot more interest in that kind of thinking, too, from those small sources.
So, like, when you say big, it's more about kind of the reach of the broadcast.
But it's not big in terms of the interest.
I think there's a lot of interest in that kind of antiestablishment or skepticism towards...
Out of the box thinking, there's a lot of interest in that kind of thing.
Do you see this news project or something like it being basically taken over the world as the main way we consume information?
Like, how do we get there?
So, okay, the idea is brilliant. You're calling it your little project in 2020.
But how does that become the new way we consume information?
I hope, first of all, just to plant a little seed there.
Because normally, the big barrier of doing anything in media is you need a ton of money.
But this costs no money at all.
I've just been paying myself.
You pay a tiny amount of money each month to Amazon to run the thing in their cloud.
There will never be any ads.
The point is not to make any money off of it.
And we just train machine learning algorithms to classify the articles and stuff.
So, it just kind of runs by itself.
So, if it actually gets good enough at some point that it starts catching on, it could scale.
And if other people carbon copy it and make other versions that are better, that's the more the merrier.
I think there's a real opportunity for machine learning to empower the individual against the powerful players.
As I said in the beginning here, it's been mostly the other way around so far,
that the big players have the AI and then they tell people this is the truth, this is how it is.
But it can just as well go the other way around.
When the internet was born, actually, a lot of people had this hope that maybe this will be a great thing for democracy,
make it easier to find out about things.
And maybe machine learning and things like this can actually help again.
And I have to say, I think it's more important than ever now,
because this is very linked also to the whole future of life as we discussed earlier.
We're getting this ever more powerful tack.
Frank, it's pretty clear if you look on the one or two generation, three generation timescale,
that there are only two ways this can end, geopolitically.
Either it ends great for all humanity, or it ends terribly for all of us.
There's really no way in between.
And we're so stuck in, because technology knows no borders.
And you can't have people fighting when the weapons just keep getting ever more powerful indefinitely.
Eventually, the luck runs out.
And right now we have, I love America, but the fact of the matter is,
what's good for America is not opposites in the long term to what's good for other countries.
It would be if this was some sort of zero sum game like it was thousands of years ago,
when the only way one country could get more resources was to take land from other countries,
because that was basically the resource.
Look at the map of Europe, some countries kept getting bigger and smaller, endless wars.
But then, since 1945, there hasn't been any war in Western Europe, and they all got way richer, because of tech.
So the optimistic outcome is that the big winner in this century is going to be America and China,
and Russia, and everybody else, because technology just makes us all healthier and wealthier.
And we just find some way of keeping the peace on this planet.
But I think, unfortunately, there are some pretty powerful forces right now
that are pushing in exactly the opposite direction and trying to demonize other countries,
which just makes it more likely that this ever more powerful tech we're building is going to be in disastrous ways.
Yeah, for aggression versus cooperation, that kind of thing.
Yeah, even look at just military AI now, right?
It was so awesome to see these dancing robots.
I loved it, right? But one of the biggest growth areas in robotics now is, of course, autonomous weapons.
And 2020 was like the best marketing year ever for autonomous weapons,
because in both Libya, Civil War, and in Nagorno Karabakh, they made the decisive difference, right?
And everybody else is like watching this, oh yeah, we want to build autonomous weapons too.
In Libya, you had, on one hand, our ally, the United Arab Emirates,
that were flying their autonomous weapons that they bought from China, bombing Libyans.
And on the other side, you had our other ally, Turkey, flying their drones.
They had no skin in the game, any of these other countries.
And of course, it was the Libyans who really got screwed.
In Nagorno Karabakh, you had actually, again, now Turkey is sending drones built by this company
that was actually founded by a guy who went to MIT AeroAstrode, you know that?
So MIT has a direct responsibility for ultimately this.
And a lot of civilians were killed there.
So because it was militarily so effective, now suddenly there's like a huge push.
Yeah, yeah, let's go build ever more autonomy into these weapons.
And it's going to be great.
And I think actually people who are obsessed about some sort of future terminers,
NATO scenario right now, should start focusing on the fact that we have two
much more urgent threats happening for machine learning.
One of them is the whole destruction of democracy that we've talked about now,
where our flow of information is being manipulated by machine learning.
And the other one is that right now, you know, this is the year when the big arms race
out of control arms race in at least Thomas weapons is going to start or it's going to stop.
So you have a sense that there is, like 2020 was an instrumental catalyst for the race of the autonomous weapons race.
Yeah, because it was the first year when they proved decisive in the battlefield.
And these ones are still not fully autonomous, mostly they're remote controlled, right?
But, you know, we could very quickly make things about, you know, the size and cost of a smartphone,
which you just put in the GPS coordinates or the face of the one you want to kill,
a skin color or whatever and it flies away and does it.
And the real good reason why the US and all the other superpowers should put the kibosh on this
is the same reason we decided to put the kibosh on bio weapons.
So, you know, we gave the future of life award that we can talk more about later.
Matthew Messelsen from Harvard before for convincing Nixon to ban bio weapons.
And I asked him, how did you do it?
And he was like, well, I just said, look, we don't want there to be a $500 weapon of mass destruction
that even all our enemies can afford, even non state actors.
And Nixon was like, good point.
You know, it's in America's interest that the powerful weapons are all really expensive.
So only we can afford them or maybe some more stable adversaries, right?
Nuclear weapons are like that.
But bio weapons were not like that.
That's why we banned them.
And that's why you never hear about them now.
That's why we love biology.
So you have a sense that it's possible for the big powerhouses in terms of the big nations in the world
to agree that autonomous weapons is not a race we want to be on.
That it doesn't end well.
Yeah, because we know it's just going to end in mass proliferation
and every terrorist everywhere is going to have these super cheap weapons that they will use against us.
And our politicians have to constantly worry about being assassinated every time they go outdoors
by some anonymous little mini drone.
We don't want that.
And even if the U.S. and China and everyone else could just agree that you can only build these weapons
if they cost at least 10 million bucks, that would be a huge win for the superpowers.
And frankly for everybody, people often push back and say,
well, it's so hard to prevent cheating.
But hey, you can say the same about bioweapons.
Take any of your RMIT colleagues in biology.
Of course they could build some nasty bioweapon if they really wanted to.
But first of all, they don't want to because they think it's disgusting because of the stigma.
And second, even if there's some sort of nutcase and want to,
it's very likely that some of their grad students or someone would rat them out
because everyone else thinks it's so disgusting.
And in fact, we now know there was even a fair bit of cheating on the bioweapons ban.
But none, no countries used them because it was so stigmatized
that it just wasn't worth revealing that they had cheated.
You talk about drones, but you kind of think that drones is the remote operation.
Which they are mostly still.
But you're not taking the next intellectual step of like, where does this go?
You're kind of saying the problem with drones is that you're removing yourself from direct violence.
Therefore, you're not able to sort of maintain the common humanity
required to make the proper decisions strategically.
But that's the criticism as opposed to like, if this is automated,
and just exactly as you said, if you automate it and there's a race,
then the technology is going to get better and better and better,
which means getting cheaper and cheaper and cheaper.
And unlike perhaps nuclear weapons, which is connected to resources in a way,
like it's hard to get the, it's hard to engineer.
It feels like it's, you know, there's too much overlap between the tech industry
and autonomous weapons to where you could have smartphone type of cheapness.
If you look at drones, you know, it's a, you know, for $1,000,
you have an incredible system that's able to maintain flight autonomously for you
and take pictures and stuff.
You could see that going into the autonomous weapon space that's,
but like, why is that not thought about or discussed enough in the public?
Do you think you see those dancing Boston Dynamics robots and everybody has this kind of,
like as if this is like a far future.
They have this like fear, like, oh, this will be Terminator in like some,
I don't know, unspecified 20, 30, 40 years.
And they don't think about, well, this is like some much less dramatic version of that is actually happening now.
It's not going to have, it's not going to be legged, it's not going to be dancing,
but it's already has the capability to use artificial intelligence to kill humans.
Yeah, the Boston Dynamics leg robots, I think the reason we imagine them holding guns
is just because you've all seen Arnold Schwarzenegger, right?
That's our reference point.
That's pretty useless.
That's not going to be the main military use of them.
They might be useful in law enforcement in the future.
And there's a whole debate about you want robots showing up at your house with guns
telling you who'll be perfectly obedient to whatever dictator controls them.
But let's leave that aside for a moment and look at what's actually relevant now.
There's a spectrum of things you can do with AI in the military.
And again, to put my card on the table, I'm not the pacifist.
I think we should have good defense.
So, for example, a predator drone is basically a fancy little remote controlled airplane.
There's a human piloting it and the decision ultimately about whether to kill somebody with it is made by a human still.
And this is a line I think we should never cross.
There's a current DOD policy.
Again, you have to have a human in the loop.
I think algorithms should never make life or death decisions.
They should be left to humans.
Now, why might we cross that line?
Well, first of all, these are expensive, right?
So, for example, when Azerbaijan had all these drones and Armenia didn't have any,
they started trying to jerry rig little cheap things, fly around.
But then, of course, the Armenians would jam them.
The Azeris would jam them.
And remote controlled things can be jammed.
That makes them inferior.
Also, there's a bit of a time delay between, you know, if we're piloting something far away,
speed of light, and the human has a reaction time as well,
it would be nice to eliminate that jamming possibility in the time delay by having it fully autonomous.
But now you might be crossing that exact line.
You might program it to just, oh, yeah, dear drone, go hover over this country for a while
and whenever you find someone who is a bad guy, you know, kill them.
Now, the machine is making these sort of decisions.
And some people who defend this still say, well, that's morally fine
because we are the good guys and we will tell it the definition of bad guy
that we think is moral.
But now it would be very naive to think that if ISIS buys that same drone
that they're going to use our definition of bad guy.
Maybe for them, bad guy is someone wearing a U.S. Army uniform.
Or maybe there will be some weird ethnic group
who decides that someone of an other ethnic group, they are the bad guys, right?
The thing is, human soldiers, with all of our faults, right,
we still have some basic wiring in us.
Like, no, it's not okay to kill kids and civilians.
And Thomas Reppin has none of that.
It's just going to do whatever is programmed.
It's like the perfect Adolf Eichmann on steroids.
Like, they told him, Adolf Eichmann, you know, you want you to do this and this and this
to make the Holocaust more efficient.
And he was like, yeah, and off he went and did it, right?
Do we really want to make machines that are like that, like completely amoral
and will take the user's definition of who is the bad guy?
And do we then want to make them so cheap that all our adversaries can have them?
Like, what could possibly go wrong?
That's the big argument for why we want to, this year, really put the kibosh on this.
And I think you can tell there's a lot of very active debate even going on
within the U.S. military and undoubtedly in other militaries around the world also
about whether we should have some sort of international agreement
to at least require that these weapons have to be above a certain size and cost,
so that things just don't totally spiral out of control.
And finally, just for your question now, but is it possible to stop it?
Because some people tell me, oh, just give up, you know.
But again, so Matthew Messelsen again from Harvard, right, who, the bio weapons hero,
he had exactly this criticism also with bio weapons.
People were like, how can you check for sure that the Russians aren't cheating?
And he told me this, I think really ingenious insight, he said, you know, Max,
some people think you have to have inspections and things,
and you have to make sure that people, you can catch the cheaters with 100% chance.
You don't need 100%, he said.
1% is usually enough.
Because if it's another big state,
I suppose China and the US have signed a treaty, drawing a certain line and saying,
yeah, these kind of drones are okay, but these fully autonomous ones are not.
Now suppose you are China and you have cheated and secretly developed some clandestine little thing,
or you're thinking about doing it, you know, what's your calculation that you do?
Well, you're like, okay, what's the probability that we're going to get caught?
If the probability is 100%, of course, we're not going to do it.
But if the probability is 5% that we're going to get caught,
then it's going to be like a huge embarrassment for us.
And we still have our nuclear weapons anyway, so it doesn't really make any enormous difference
in terms of deterring the US, you know.
And that feeds the stigma that you kind of establish, like this fabric, this universal stigma over the thing.
Exactly.
It's very reasonable for them to say, well, you know, we probably get away with it,
but if we don't, then the US will know we cheated,
and then they're going to go full tilt with their program and say, look, the Chinese are cheaters,
and now we have all these weapons against us, and that's bad.
So the stigma alone is very, very powerful.
And again, look what happened with bioweapons, right?
It's been 50 years now.
When was the last time you read about a bioterrorism attack?
The only deaths I really know about with bioweapons that have happened,
when we Americans managed to kill some of our own with anthrax,
you know, the idiot who sent them to Tom Daschel and others in letters, right?
And similarly, in Sverlovsk in the Soviet Union,
they had some anthrax in some lab there.
Maybe they were cheating or who knows,
and it leaked out and killed a bunch of Russians.
I'd say that's a pretty good success, right?
50 years, just two own goals by the superpowers, and then nothing.
And that's why whenever I ask anyone what they think about biology,
they think it's great.
They associate it with new cures, new diseases, maybe a good vaccine.
This is how I want to think about AI in the future.
And I want others to think about AI too,
as a source of all these great solutions to our problems,
not as, oh, AI.
Oh, yeah, that's the reason I feel scared going outside these days.
Yeah, it's kind of brilliant that the bio weapons and nuclear weapons,
we've figured out, I mean, of course, there's still a huge source of danger,
but we figured out some way of creating rules and social stigma
over these weapons that then creates a stability to our,
whatever that game theoretic stability there, of course.
Exactly, exactly.
And we don't have that with AI, and you're kind of screaming from the top
of the mountain about this, that we need to find that,
because just like, it's very possible with the future of life,
as you've pointed out, Institute Awards pointed out that with nuclear weapons,
we could have destroyed ourselves quite a few times.
And it's a learning experience that is very costly.
We gave this Future Life Award, we gave it the first time to this guy,
Vasily Arkhipov, he was on, most people haven't even heard of him.
Yeah, can you say who he is?
Vasily Arkhipov, he has, in my opinion,
made the greatest positive contribution to humanity of any human in modern history.
And maybe it sounds like hyperbole here, like I'm just over the top,
but let me tell you the story, and I think maybe you'll agree.
So during the Cuban Missile Crisis, we Americans first didn't know
that the Russians had sent four submarines, but we caught two of them,
and we didn't know that, so we dropped practice depth charges on the one that he was on,
trying to force it to the surface.
But we didn't know that this nuclear submarine actually was a nuclear submarine
with a nuclear torpedo.
We also didn't know that they had an authorization to launch it without clearance from Moscow.
And we also didn't know that they were running out of electricity,
their batteries were almost dead, they were running out of oxygen,
sailors were fainting left and right.
The temperature was about 110, 120 Fahrenheit on board,
it was really hellish conditions, really just a kind of doomsday.
And at that point, these giant explosions start happening
from Americans dropping these.
The captain thought World War III had begun.
They decided that they were going to launch the nuclear torpedo.
And one of them shouted, you know, we're all going to die,
but we're not going to disgrace our navy.
We don't know what would have happened if there had been a giant mushroom cloud all of a sudden
against Americans, but since everybody had their hands on the triggers,
you don't have to be too creative to think that it could have led to an all out nuclear war,
in which case we wouldn't be having this conversation now, right?
What actually took place was they needed three people to approve this.
The captain had said yes, there was the Communist Party political officer,
he also said yes, let's do it.
And the third man was this guy Vasily Arkhipov, who said,
yeah, for some reason he was just more chill than the others
and he was the right man at the right time.
I don't want us as a species rely on the right person being there at the right time.
You know, we tracked down his family living in relative poverty outside Moscow.
When he flew his daughter, he had passed away and flew them to London.
They had never been to the West even.
It was incredibly moving to get to honor them for this.
The next year we gave this future life award to Stanislav Petrov.
Have you heard of him?
Yes.
He was in charge of the Soviet early warning station which was built with Soviet technology
and honestly not that reliable.
It said that there were five US missiles coming in.
Again, if they had launched at that point, we probably wouldn't be having this conversation.
He decided based on just mainly gut instinct to just not escalate this.
I'm very glad he wasn't replaced by an AI that was just automatically falling orders.
Then we gave the third one to Matthew Messelsen.
Last year we gave this award to these guys who actually used technology for good,
not avoiding something bad, but for something good.
The guys who eliminated this disease, which is way worse than COVID,
that had killed half a billion people in its violent century.
Smallpox.
You mentioned it earlier.
COVID on average kills less than 1% of people who get it.
Smallpox, about 30%.
Ultimately, Viktor Zhdanov and Bill Fagy, most of my colleagues have never heard of either of them,
one American, one Russian, they did this amazing effort.
Not only was Zhdanov able to get the US and the Soviet Union to team up against smallpox
during the Cold War,
but Fagy came up with this ingenious strategy for making it actually go all the way
to defeat the disease without funding for vaccinating everyone.
As a result, we went from 15 million deaths the year I was born in smallpox.
So what do we have in COVID now?
A little bit short of 2 million, right?
Yes.
To zero deaths, of course, this year.
And forever, there have been 200 million people,
who would have died since then by smallpox had it not been for this.
So isn't science awesome when you use it for good?
And the reason we want to celebrate these sort of people is to remind them of this.
Science is so awesome when you use it for good.
And those awards actually, the variety there, it's a very interesting picture.
So the first two are looking at, it's kind of exciting to think that these average humans,
in some sense, there are products of billions of other humans that came before them, evolution.
And some little, you said gut, but there's something in there that stopped the annihilation of the human race.
And that's a magical thing, but that's like this deeply human thing.
And then there's the other aspect where it's also very human,
which is to build solution to the existential crises that we're facing,
to build it, to take responsibility, to come up with different technologies and so on.
And both of those are deeply human.
The gut and the mind, whatever that is.
The best is when they work together.
Archipelago, I wish I could have met him, of course, but he had passed away.
He was really a fantastic military officer, combining all the best traits that we in America admire in our military.
Because first of all, he was very loyal, of course.
He never even told anyone about this during his whole life, even though you think he had some bragging rights, right?
But he just was like, this is just business, just doing my job.
It only came out later after his death.
And second, the reason he did the right thing was not because he was some sort of liberal,
not because he was just, oh, you know, peace and love.
It was partly because he had been the captain on another submarine that had a nuclear reactor meltdown.
And it was his heroism that helped contain this.
That's why he died of cancer later also.
But he's seen many of his crew members die.
And I think for him, that gave him this gut feeling that, you know,
if there's a nuclear war between the US and the Soviet Union, the whole world is going to go through
what I saw my dear crew members suffer through.
It wasn't just an abstract thing for him.
I think it was real.
And second, though, not just the gut, the mind, right?
He was, for some reason, very level headed personality and very smart guy,
which is exactly what we want our best fighter pilots to be also.
I never forget Neil Armstrong when he's landing on the moon and almost running out of gas.
And he doesn't even change, let me say 30 seconds.
He doesn't even change the tone of voice, just keeps going.
Archipelago, I think, was just like that.
So when the explosions start going off and his captain is screaming and we should nuke them and all,
he's like, I don't think the Americans are trying to sink us.
I think they're trying to send us a message.
That's pretty badass.
Coolness.
Because he said, if they wanted to sink us, he said, listen, listen,
it's alternating one loud explosion on the left, one on the right, one on the left, one on the right.
He was the only one to notice this pattern.
And he's like, I think this is them trying to send us a signal that they wanted to surface
and they're not going to sink us.
And somehow this is how he then managed it ultimately with his combination of gut
and also just cool analytical thinking, was able to deescalate the whole thing.
And yeah, so this is some of the best in humanity.
I guess coming back to what we talked about earlier is the combination of the neural network,
the instinctive, you know, with I'm tearing up here, getting emotional.
But he is one of my superheroes having both the heart and the mind combined.
And especially in that time, there's something about the, I mean, this is a very,
in America, people are used to this kind of idea of being the individual of like on your own thinking.
I think in the Soviet Union under communism, it's actually much harder to do that.
Oh yeah, he didn't even, he even got, he didn't get any accolades either when he came back for this, right?
They just wanted to hush the whole thing up.
Yeah, there's echoes of that with Chernobyl, there's all kinds of, that's one,
that's a really hopeful thing that amidst big centralized powers,
whether it's companies or states, there's still the power of the individual to think on their own to act.
But I think we need to think of people like this, not as a panacea we can always count on,
but rather as a wake up call, you know.
So because of them, because of Arkhipov, we are alive to learn from this lesson,
to learn from the fact that we shouldn't keep playing Russian roulette
and almost have a nuclear war by mistake now and then,
because relying on luck is not a good long term strategy.
If you keep playing Russian roulette over and over again,
the probability of surviving just drops exponentially with time.
And if you have some probability of having an accidental nuclear war every year,
the probability of not having one also drops exponentially.
I think we can do better than that.
So I think the message is very clear, once in a while shit happens,
and there's a lot of very concrete things we can do to reduce the risk of things like that happening in the first place.
On the AI front, if we just link on that for a second.
So you're friends with, you often talk with Elon Musk throughout history.
You've did a lot of interesting things together.
He has a set of fears about the future of artificial intelligence, AGI.
Do you have a sense, we've already talked about the things we should be worried about with AI.
Do you have a sense of the shape of his fears in particular,
about AI, which subset of what we've talked about, whether it's creating,
it's that direction of creating these giant computational systems that are not explainable,
they're not intelligible intelligence, or is it the...
And then as a branch of that, is it the manipulation by big corporations of that,
or individual evil people to use that for destruction, or the unintentional consequences.
Do you have a sense of where his thinking is on this?
From my many conversations with Elon, I certainly have a model of how he thinks.
It's actually very much like the way I think also, I'll elaborate on it a bit.
I just want to push back on when you said evil people.
I don't think it's a very helpful concept, evil people.
Sometimes people do very, very bad things, but they usually do it because they think it's a good thing,
because somehow other people had told them that that was a good thing,
or given them incorrect information, or whatever.
I believe in the fundamental goodness of humanity that if we educate people well,
and they find out how things really are, people generally want to do good and be good.
There's a sense of value alignment.
It's about information, it's about knowledge, and then once we have that,
we'll likely be able to do good in the way that's aligned with everybody else who thinks it's good.
Yeah, and it's not just the individual people we have to align,
so we don't just want people to be educated to know the way things actually are,
and to treat each other well, but we also need to align other nonhuman entities.
We've talked about corporations, there has to be institutions,
so that what they do is actually good for the country they're in,
and we should make sure that what countries do is actually good for the species as a whole, etc.
Coming back to Elon, my understanding of how Elon sees this is really quite similar to my own,
which is one of the reasons I like him so much, and enjoy talking with him so much.
He's quite different from most people in that he thinks much more than most people about their really big picture,
not just what's going to happen in the next election cycle,
and millennia, millions and billions of years from now.
When you look in this more cosmic perspective, it's so obvious that we're gazing out into this universe
that as far as we can tell is mostly dead, with life being almost imperceptibly tiny perturbation, right?
And he sees this enormous opportunity for our universe to come alive,
first to become an interplanetary species.
Mars is obviously just first stop on this cosmic journey,
and precisely because he thinks more long term, it's much more clear to him than to most people
that what we do with this Russian roulette thing we keep playing with our nukes is a really poor strategy,
a really reckless strategy, and also that we're just building these ever more powerful AI systems
that we don't understand is also a really reckless strategy.
I feel Elon is a humanist in the sense that he wants an awesome future for humanity.
He wants it to be us that control the machines, rather than the machines that control us.
And why shouldn't we insist on that? We're building them after all, right?
Why should we build things that just make us into some little cog in the machinery
that has no further say in the matter, right?
It's not my idea of an inspiring future either.
Yeah, if you think on the cosmic scale in terms of both time and space, so much is put into perspective.
Whenever I have a bad day, that's what I think about. It immediately makes me feel better.
It makes me sad that for us individual humans, at least for now, the ride ends too quickly.
We don't get to experience the cosmic scale.
I mean, I think of our universe sometimes as an organism that has only begun to wake up a tiny bit.
Just like the very first little glimmers of consciousness you have in the morning when you start coming around.
Before the coffee.
Before the coffee. Even before you get out of bed, before you even open your eyes, start to wake up a little bit.
There's something here, you know. That's very much how I think of where we are.
All those galaxies out there, I think they're really beautiful.
But why are they beautiful?
They're beautiful because conscious entities are actually observing them and experiencing them through our telescopes.
I define consciousness as subjective experience.
Whether it be colors or emotions or sounds.
So beauty is an experience.
Meaning is an experience.
Purpose is an experience.
If there was no conscious experience observing these galaxies, they wouldn't be beautiful.
If we do something dumb with advanced AI in the future here and Earth originating, life goes extinct.
And that was it for this.
If there is nothing else with telescopes in our universe, then it's kind of game over for beauty and meaning and purpose in our whole universe.
And I think that would be just such an opportunity lost, frankly.
And I think when Elon points this out, he gets very unfairly maligned in the media for all the dumb media bias reasons we talked about, right?
They want to print precisely the things about Elon out of context that are really clickbaity.
Like he has gotten so much flak for this summoning the demon statement.
I happen to know exactly the context because I was in the front row when he gave that talk. It was at MIT, you'll be pleased to know.
It was the AeroAstro anniversary.
They had Buzz Aldrin there from the moon landing, a whole house, a Kresge auditorium packed with MIT students.
And he had this amazing Q&A.
It might have gone for an hour and they talked about rockets and Mars and everything.
At the very end, this one student who has actually hit my class asked him, what about AI?
Elon makes this one comment and they take this out of context, print it, goes viral.
Was it like with AI where summoning the demons and stuff like that?
And try to cast him as some sort of doom and gloom dude.
You know Elon.
He's not the doom and gloom dude.
He is such a positive visionary.
And the whole reason he warns about this is because he realizes more than most what the opportunity cost is of screwing up.
That there is so much awesomeness in the future that we can and our descendants can enjoy if we don't screw up, right?
I get so pissed off when people try to cast him as some sort of technophobic Luddite.
And at this point, it's kind of ludicrous when I hear people say that people who worry about artificial general intelligence are Luddites.
Because of course, if you look more closely, you have some of the most outspoken people making warnings.
Are people like Professor Stuart Russell from Berkeley who's written the best selling AI textbook, you know.
So claiming that he is a Luddite who doesn't understand AI is the joke is really on the people who said it.
But I think more broadly, this message is really not sunk in at all.
What it is that people worry about.
They think that Elon and Stuart Russell and others are worried about the dancing robots picking up an AR15 and going on a rampage, right?
They think they're worried about robots turning evil.
They're not. I'm not.
The risk is not malice. It's competence.
The risk is just that we build some systems that are incredibly competent, which means they're always going to get their goals accomplished.
Even if they clash with our goals.
That's the risk.
Why did we humans, you know, drive the West African black rhino extinct?
Is it because we're malicious, evil rhinoceros haters?
No, it's just because our goals didn't align with the goals of those rhinos and tough luck for the rhinos, you know.
So the point is just we don't want to put ourselves in the position of those rhinos creating these something more powerful than us.
If we haven't first figured out how to align the goals and I am optimistic.
I think we could do it if we worked really hard on it because I spent a lot of time around intelligent entities that were more intelligent than me.
My mom and my dad and I was little and that was fine because their goals were actually aligned with mine quite well.
But we've seen today many examples of where the goals of our powerful systems are not so aligned.
So those click through optimization algorithms that are polarized social media, right?
They were actually pretty poorly aligned with what was good for democracy turned out.
And again, almost all problems we've had in machine learning again came so far, not from Alice, but from poor alignment.
And it's that's exactly why that's why we should be concerned about in the future.
Do you think it's possible that with systems like Neuralink and brain computer interfaces, you know, again, thinking of the cosmic scale,
Elon's talked about this, but others have as well throughout history of figuring out how the exact mechanism of how to achieve that kind of alignment.
So one of them is having a symbiosis with AI, which is like coming up with clever ways where we're like stuck together.
And this weird relationship, whether it's biological or in some kind of other way, do you think there's that's a possibility of having that kind of symbiosis?
Or do we want to instead kind of focus on this distinct entities of us humans talking to these intelligible, self doubting AIs,
maybe like Stuart Russell thinks about it, like these, we're we're self doubting and full of uncertainty and have our AI systems are full of uncertainty.
We communicate back and forth and in that way achieves symbiosis.
I honestly don't know. I would say that because we don't know for sure what if any of our which of any of our ideas will work.
But we do know that if we don't, I'm pretty convinced that if we don't get any of these things to work and just barge ahead, then our species is, you know, probably going to go extinct this century.
I think this century, you think like you think we're facing this crisis is a 21st century crisis.
This century will be remembered on a hard drive somewhere or maybe by future generations is like,
like there will be future future of life as a two awards for people that have done something about AI.
It could also end even worse, whether we're not superseded by leaving any AI behind either.
We just totally wipe out, you know, like on Easter Island.
Our century is long.
No, there are still 79 years left of it.
Think about how far we've come just in the last 30 years.
So we can talk more about what might go wrong.
But you asked me this really good question about what's the best strategy?
Is it Neuralink or Russell's approach or whatever?
I think, you know, when we did the Manhattan Project, we didn't know if any of our four ideas for enriching uranium and getting out the uranium 235 were going to work.
But we felt this was really important to get it before Hitler did.
So you know what we did?
We tried all four of them here.
I think it's analogous where there's the greatest threat that's ever faced our species and of course US National Security by implication.
We don't know if we don't have any method that's guaranteed to work, but we have a lot of ideas.
So we should invest pretty heavily in pursuing all of them with an open mind and hope that one of them at least works.
These are the good news is the century is long, you know, and it might take decades until we have artificial general intelligence.
So we have some time, hopefully, but it takes a long time to solve these very, very difficult problems.
It's going to actually be the most difficult problem we were ever trying to solve as a species.
So we have to start now.
So we don't want to have it rather than, you know, begin thinking about it the night before some people who've had too much Red Bull switch it on.
And we have to coming back to your question, we have to pursue all of these different avenues and see if you're my investment advisor and I was trying to invest in the future.
How do you think the human species is most likely to destroy itself in the century?
Yeah, so if the crises, many of the crises we're facing are really before us within the next hundred years, how do we make explicit, make known the unknowns and solve those problems to avoid the biggest starting with the biggest existential crisis.
So as your investment advisor, how are you planning to make money on us destroying ourselves?
I don't know.
It might be the Russian origins that somehow is involved.
At the micro level of detailed strategies, of course, these are unsolved problems.
For AI alignment, we can break it into three sub problems that are all unsolved.
I think you want first to make machines understand our goals, then adopt our goals and then retain our goals.
So hit on all three real quickly.
The problem when Andreas Lubitz told his autopilot to fly into the Alps was that the computer didn't even understand anything about his goals, right?
It was too dumb.
It could have understood actually, but we would have had to put some effort in as a system designer to don't fly into mountains.
So that's the first challenge. How do you program into computers human values, human goals?
Rather than saying, oh, it's so hard, we should start with the simple stuff, as I said.
Self driving cars, airplanes, just put in all the goals that we all agree on already and then have a habit of whenever a machine gets smarter so they can understand one level higher goals, you know, put them into.
The second challenge is getting them to adopt the goals.
It's easy for situations like that where you just program it in, but when you have self learning systems like children, you know, any parent knows that there is a difference between getting our kids to understand what we want them to do and to actually adopt our goals, right?
With humans, with children, fortunately, they go through this phrase, first they're too dumb to understand what we want our goals are, and then they have this period of some years when they're both smart enough to understand them and malleable enough that we have a chance to raise them well,
and then they become teenagers, kind of too late, but we have this window with machines, the challenges, the intelligence might grow so fast that that window is pretty short.
So that's a research problem.
The third one is how do you make sure they keep the goals?
If they keep learning more and getting smarter.
Many sci fi movies are about how you have something which initially was aligned, but then things kind of go off keel and, you know, my kids were very, very excited about their Legos when they were little.
And now they're just gathering dust in the basement, you know, if we create machines that are really on board with a goal of taking care of humanity, we don't want them to get as bored with us and as my kids got with Legos.
So this is another research challenge.
How can you make some sort of recursively self improving system retain certain basic goals?
That said, a lot of adult people still play with Legos, so maybe we succeeded with Legos.
I like your optimism.
So not all AI systems have to maintain the goals, right?
Some just some fraction.
Yeah.
So there's there's a lot of talented AI researchers now who have heard of this and want to work on it.
Not so much funding for it yet.
Of the billions that go into building AI more powerful.
It's only a miniscule fraction.
So for going into the safety research, my attitude is generally we should not try to slow down the technology, but we should greatly accelerate the investment in this sort of safety research.
And also make sure it's been it's this was very embarrassing last year, but you know, the NSF decided to give out six of these big institutes.
We got one of them for AI and science.
You asked me about another one was supposed to be for a safety research.
And they gave it to people studying oceans and climate and stuff.
Yeah.
So I'm all for studying oceans and climates, but we need to actually have some money that actually goes into a safety research also and doesn't just get grabbed.
By whatever.
That's a fantastic investment.
And then at the higher level, you asked this question, OK, what can we do?
You know, what are the biggest risks?
I think I think we cannot just consider this to be only a technical problem.
Again, because if you solve only the technical problem, can I play with your robot?
Yes, please.
Get our machines, you know, to just blindly obey the orders we give them.
So we can always trust that it will do what we want.
That might be great for the owner of the robot.
It might not be so great for the rest of humanity if if that person is that least favorite world leader or whatever you imagine, right?
So we have to also take a look at the apply alignment, not just to machines, but to all the other powerful structures.
That's why it's so important to strengthen our democracy.
Again, as I said, to have institutions make sure that the playing field is not rigged so that corporations are given the right incentives to do the things that both make profit and are good for people.
To make sure that countries have incentives to do things that are both good for their people and don't screw up the rest of the world.
And this is not just something for AI nerds to geek out on.
This is an interesting challenge for political scientists, economists, and so many other thinkers.
So one of the magical things that perhaps makes this earth quite unique is that it's home to conscious beings.
So you mentioned consciousness.
Perhaps as a small aside, because we didn't really get specific to what how we might do the alignment, like you said, is there just a really important research problem?
But do you think engineering consciousness into AI systems is a possibility?
Is something that we might one day do or is there something fundamental to consciousness that is fundamental to humans and humans only?
I think it's possible.
I think both consciousness and intelligence are information processing, certain types of information processing.
And that fundamentally, it doesn't matter whether the information is processed by carbon atoms in neurons and brains or by silicon atoms and so on in our technology.
Some people disagree.
This is what I think is as physicists that I and the consciousness is the same kind of you said consciousness is information processing.
So meaning, I think you had a quote of something like it's information knowing itself, that kind of thing.
I think consciousness is the way information feels when it's being processed in certain complex ways.
We don't know exactly what those complex ways are.
It's clear that most of the information processing in our brains does not create an experience.
We're not even aware of it.
For example, you're not aware of your heartbeat regulation right now, even though it's clearly being done by your body.
It's just kind of doing its own thing.
When you go jogging, there's a lot of complicated stuff about how you put your foot down.
And we know it's hard.
That's why robots used to fall over so much.
But you're mostly unaware about it.
Your brain, your CEO consciousness module just sends an email, hey, I want to keep jogging along this path.
The rest is on autopilot.
So most of it is not conscious.
But somehow there is some of the information processing, which is we don't know what exactly.
I think this is a science problem that I hope one day we'll have some equation for or something.
So we can be able to build a consciousness detector and say, yeah, here there is some consciousness.
Here there is not.
Oh, don't boil that lobster because it's feeling pain or it's okay because it's not feeling pain.
Right now we treat this as sort of just metaphysics.
But it would be very useful in emergency rooms to know if a patient has locked in syndrome and is conscious,
or if they are actually just out.
And in the future, if you build a very, very intelligent helper robot to take care of you,
I think you'd like to know if you should feel guilty about shutting it down,
or if it's just like a zombie going through the motions like a fancy tape recorder.
And once we can make progress on the science of consciousness and figure out what is conscious and what isn't,
then assuming we want to create positive experiences and not suffering,
we'll probably choose to build some machines that are deliberately unconscious that do incredibly boring,
repetitive jobs in an iron mine somewhere or whatever.
And maybe we'll choose to create helper robots for the elderly that are conscious so that people don't just feel creeped out,
that the robot is just faking it when it acts like it's sad or happy.
Like you said, elderly, I think everybody gets pretty deeply lonely in this world.
And so there's a place, I think, for everybody to have a connection with conscious beings,
whether they're human or otherwise.
But I know for sure that I would, if I had a robot, if I was going to develop any kind of personal emotional connection with it,
I would be very creeped out if I knew it in intellectual level that the whole thing was just a fraud.
You know, today you can buy a little talking doll for a kid,
which will say things and the little child will often think that this is actually conscious
and even real secrets to it that then go on the internet with all sorts of creepy repercussions.
You know, I would not want to be just hacked and tricked like this.
If I was going to be developing real emotional connections with a robot,
I would want to know that this is actually real.
It's acting conscious, acting happy because it actually feels it.
And I think this is not sci fi.
It's possible to measure, to come up with tools.
After we understand the science of consciousness, you're saying we'll be able to come up with tools that can measure consciousness
and definitively say like this thing is experiencing the things it says it's experiencing.
Kind of by definition, if it is a physical phenomena, information processing,
and we know that some information processing is conscious and some isn't,
well then there is something there to be discovered with the methods of science.
Giulio Tononi has stuck his neck out the farthest and written down some equations for a theory.
Maybe that's right, maybe it's wrong, we certainly don't know.
But I applaud that kind of efforts to sort of take this,
say this is not just something that philosophers can have beer and muse about,
but something we can measure and study and coming, being that back to us.
I think what we would probably choose to do, as I said, is if we cannot figure this out,
choose to be quite mindful about what sort of consciousness, if any, we put in different machines that we have.
And certainly, we wouldn't want to make, we should not be making much of machines that suffer without us even knowing it, right?
And if at any point someone decides to upload themselves like Ray Kurzweil wants to do, I don't know if you've had him on your show.
We agree, but then COVID happens, so we're waiting it out a little bit.
You know, suppose he uploads himself into this robo array, and it talks like him, and acts like him, and laughs like him,
and before he powers off his biological body, he would probably be pretty disturbed if he realized that there's no one home.
This robot is not having any subjective experience, right?
If humanity gets replaced by machine descendants, do all these cool things, and build spaceships, and go to intergalactic rock concerts,
and it turns out that they are all unconscious, just going through the motions.
Wouldn't that be like the ultimate zombie apocalypse, right? Just a play for empty benches?
Yeah, I have a sense that there's some kind of, once we understand consciousness better,
we'll understand that there's some kind of continuum, and it would be a greater appreciation.
And we'll probably understand, just like you said, it'd be unfortunate if it's a trick.
We'll probably definitely understand that love is indeed a trick that will play on each other, that we humans are.
We convince ourselves we're conscious, but we're really, you know, awesome trees and dolphins are all the same kind of consciousness.
Can I try to cheer you up a little bit with a philosophical thought here about the love part?
Yes, let's do it.
You might say, okay, love is just a collaboration enabler, and then maybe you can go and get depressed about that.
But I think that would be the wrong conclusion, actually.
I know that the only reason I enjoy food is because my genes hacked me, and they don't want me to starve to death,
not because they care about me consciously enjoying succulent delights of pistachio ice cream,
but they just want me to make copies of them.
So in a sense, the whole enjoyment of food is also a scam, like this.
But does that mean I shouldn't take pleasure in this pistachio ice cream?
I love pistachio ice cream, and I can tell you, I know this is an experimental fact.
I enjoy pistachio ice cream every bit as much, even though I scientifically know exactly what kind of scam this was.
Your genes really appreciate that you like the pistachio ice cream.
Well, but I, my mind appreciates it too, you know, and I have a conscious experience right now.
Ultimately, all of my brain is also just something the genes built to copy themselves.
But so what, you know, I'm grateful that, yeah, thanks genes for doing this,
but, you know, now it's my brain that's in charge here, and I'm going to enjoy my conscious experience.
Thank you very much.
And not just the pistachio ice cream, but also the love I feel for my amazing wife and all the other delights of being conscious.
I don't, actually Richard Feynman, I think said this so well.
He is also the guy, you know, really got me into physics.
Some art friend said that, oh, science kind of just is the party pooper.
It kind of ruins the fun, right?
When like, you have a beautiful flowers as the artist, and then the scientist is going to deconstruct that into just a blob of quarks and electrons.
And Feynman pushed back on that in such a beautiful way, which I think also can be used to push back and make you not feel guilty about falling in love.
So here's what Feynman basically said.
He said to his friend, you know, yeah, I can also, as a scientist, see that this is a beautiful flower.
Thank you very much.
Maybe I can't draw as good a painting as you because I'm not as talented an artist, but yeah, I can really see the beauty in it.
And it just, it also looks beautiful to me.
But in addition to that, Feynman said, as a scientist, I see even more beauty that the artist did not see, right?
Suppose this is a flower on a blossoming apple tree, you could say this tree has more beauty in it than just the colors and the fragrance.
This tree is made of air, Feynman wrote.
This is one of my favorite Feynman quotes ever.
And it took the carbon out of the air and bound it in using the flaming heat of the sun, you know, to turn the air into tree.
And when you burn logs in your fireplace, it's really beautiful to think that this is being reversed.
Now the tree is going, the wood is going back into air and in this flaming, beautiful dance of the fire that the artist can see is the flaming light of the sun that was bound in to turn the air into tree.
And then the ashes is the little residue that didn't come from the air, that the tree sucked out of the ground, you know.
Feynman said, these are beautiful things and science just adds.
It doesn't subtract.
And I feel exactly that way about love and about pistachio ice cream also.
I can understand that there is even more nuance to the whole thing, right?
At this very visceral level, you can fall in love just as much as someone who knows nothing about neuroscience.
But you can also appreciate this even greater beauty in it.
Isn't it remarkable that it came about from this completely lifeless universe, just a bunch of hot blob of plasma expanding?
And then over the eons, you know, gradually, first the strong nuclear force decided to combine quarks together into nuclei and then the electric force bound in electrons and made atoms.
And then they clustered it from gravity and you've got planets and stars and this and that.
And then natural selection came along and the genes had their little thing and you started getting what went from seeming like a completely pointless universe.
So we're just trying to increase entropy and approach heat depth into something that looked more goal oriented.
Isn't that kind of beautiful?
And then this goal orientedness through evolution got ever more sophisticated where you got ever more.
And then you started getting this thing which is kind of like DeepMind's Mu Zero and steroids, the ultimate self play is not what DeepMind's AI does against itself to get better at the go.
It's what all these little cork blobs did against each other in the game of survival of the fittest.
Now, when you had really dumb bacteria living in a simple environment, there wasn't much incentive to get intelligent, but then the life made environment more complex.
And then there was more incentive to get even smarter.
And that gave the other organisms more incentive to also get smarter.
And then here we are now just like Mu Zero learned to become world master at the go and chess from playing against itself by just playing against itself.
All the quarks here on our planet and electrons have created giraffes and elephants and humans and love.
I just find that really beautiful.
And I think that just adds to the enjoyment of love.
It doesn't subtract anything.
Do you feel a little more careful now?
I feel way better.
That was incredible.
So this self play of quarks, taking back to the beginning of our conversation a little bit, there's so many exciting possibilities about artificial intelligence understanding the basic laws of physics.
Do you think AI will help us unlock?
There's been quite a bit of excitement throughout the history of physics of coming up with more and more general simple laws that explain the nature of our reality.
And then the ultimate of that would be a theory of everything that combines everything together.
Do you think it's possible that one we humans, but perhaps AI systems will figure out a theory of physics that unifies all the laws of physics?
Yeah, I think it's absolutely possible.
I think it's very clear that we're going to see a great boost to science.
We're already seeing a boost actually from machine learning, helping science. Alpha fold was an example, you know, decades old protein folding problem.
And gradually, yeah, unless we go extinct by doing something dumb like we discussed, I think it's very likely that our understanding of physics will become so good that our technology will no longer be limited by human
intelligence, but instead be limited by the laws of physics.
So our tech today is limited by what we've been able to invent, right?
I think as AI progresses, it'll just be limited by the speed of light and other physical limits, which would mean it's going to be just dramatically beyond, you know, where we are now.
Do you think it's a fundamentally mathematical pursuit of trying to understand like the laws of the governing our universe from a mathematical perspective?
It's almost like if it's AI, it's exploring the space of like theorems and those kinds of things.
Or is there some other more computational ideas, more sort of empirical ideas?
They're both, I would say, it's really interesting to look out at the landscape of everything we call science today.
So here you come now with this big new hammer, it says machine learning on it and ask, you know, where are there some nails that you can help with here that you can hammer?
Ultimately, if machine learning gets the point that it can do everything better than us, it will be able to help across the whole space of science.
But maybe we can anchor it by starting a little bit right now near term and see how we kind of move forward.
So like right now, first of all, you have a lot of big data science where, for example, with telescopes, we are able to collect way more data every hour than a grad student can just pour over like in the old times, right?
And machine learning is already being used very effectively, even at MIT, to find planets around other stars, to detect exciting new signatures of new particle physics in the sky,
to detect the ripples in the fabric of space time that we call gravitational waves caused by enormous black holes crashing into each other halfway across the observable universe.
Machine learning is running and taking it right now, you know, doing all these things and it's really helping all these experimental fields.
There is a separate front of physics, computational physics, which is getting an enormous boost also.
So we had to do all our computations by hand, right?
People would have these giant books with tables of logarithms and oh my God, it pains me to even think how long time it would have taken to do simple stuff.
Then we started to get calculators and computers that could do some basic math for us.
Now what we're starting to see is kind of a shift from go fi computational physics to neural network computational physics.
What I mean by that is most computational physics would be done by humans programming in the intelligence of how to do the computation into the computer.
Just as when Gary Kasparov got his posterior kicked by IBM's Deep Blue in chess, humans had programmed in exactly how to play chess.
Intelligence came from the humans, it wasn't learned, right?
Mu zero can be not only Kasparov in chess, but also stock fish, which is the best go fi chess program by learning.
And we're seeing more of that now, that shift beginning to happen in physics. So let me give you an example.
So lattice QCD is an area of physics whose goal is basically to take the periodic table and just compute the whole thing from first principles.
This is not the search for theory of everything.
We already know the theory that's supposed to produce as output the periodic table, which atoms are stable, how heavy they are, all that good stuff.
These are spectral lines. It's a theory, lattice QCD, you can put it on your t shirt, our colleague Frank Wilczek got the Nobel Prize for working on it.
But the math is just too hard for us to solve. We have not been able to start with these equations and solve them to the extent that we can predict, oh yeah.
And then there is carbon, and this is what the spectrum of the carbon atom looks like.
But awesome people are building these super computer simulations where you just put in these equations and you make a big cubic lattice of space.
Or actually it's a very small lattice because you're going down to the subatomic scale and you try to solve it.
But it's just so computationally expensive that we still haven't been able to calculate things as accurately as we measure them in many cases.
And now machine learning is really revolutionizing this.
So my colleague Fiola Shanahan at MIT, for example, she's been using this really cool machine learning technique called normalizing flows,
where she's realized she can actually speed up the calculation dramatically by having the AI learn how to do things faster.
Another area like this where we suck up an enormous amount of super computer time to do physics is black hole collisions.
So now that we've done the sexy stuff of detecting a bunch of this with LIGO and other experiments, we want to be able to know what we're seeing.
And so it's a very simple conceptual problem. It's the two body problem.
Newton solved it for classical gravity hundreds of years ago, but the two body problem is still not fully solved.
For black holes.
Yes, a nice thing is gravity because they won't just orbit each other forever anymore, two things.
They give off gravitational waves and make sure they crash into each other.
And the game, what you want to do is you want to figure out, okay, what kind of wave comes out as a function of the masses of the two black holes,
as a function of how they're spinning relative to each other, etc.
And that is so hard.
It can take months of super computer time on massive numbers of cores to do it, you know.
Wouldn't it be great if you can use machine learning to greatly speed that up, right?
Now you can use the expensive old go fi calculation as the truth and then see if machine learning can figure out a smarter, faster way of getting the right answer.
Yet another area, like computational physics, these are probably the big three that suck up the most computer time.
Lattice QCD, black hole collisions and cosmological simulations, where you take not a subatomic thing and try to figure out the mass of the proton,
but you take something that's enormous and try to look at how all the galaxies get formed in there.
There again, there are a lot of very cool ideas right now about how you can use machine learning to do this sort of stuff better.
The difference between this and the big data is you kind of make the data yourself, right?
And then finally, we're looking over the physical landscape and seeing what can we hammer with machine learning, right?
So we talked about experimental data, big data, discovering cool stuff that we humans then look more closely at.
Then we talked about taking the expensive computations we're doing now and figuring out how to do the much faster and better with AI.
And finally, let's go really theoretical.
So things like discovering equations, having deep fundamental insights.
This is something closest to what I've been doing in my group.
We talked earlier about the whole AI Feynman project, where if you just have some data, how do you automatically discover equations that seem to describe this well,
that you can then go back as a human and work with and test and explore.
And you asked a really good question also about if this is sort of a search problem in some sense.
That's very deep, actually, what you said, because it is.
Suppose I asked you to prove some mathematical theorem.
What is a proof in math? It's just a long string of steps, logical steps that you can write out with symbols.
And once you find it, it's very easy to write a program to check whether it's a valid proof or not.
So why is it so hard to prove it then?
Well, because there are ridiculously many possible candidate proofs you could write down, right?
If the proof contains 10,000 symbols, even if there are only 10 options for what each symbol could be, that's 10 to the power of 1,000 possible proofs,
which is way more than there are atoms in our universe, right?
So you could say it's trivial to prove these things.
You just write a computer, generate all strings, and then check, is this a valid proof? No.
Is this a valid proof? No.
And then you just keep doing this forever.
But it is fundamentally a search problem.
You just want to search the space of all strings of symbols to find the one that is the proof, right?
And there's a whole area of machine learning called search.
How do you search through some giant space to find the needle in the haystack?
It's easier in cases where there's a clear measure of good, like you're not just right or wrong,
but this is better and this is worse, so you can maybe get some hints as to which direction to go in.
That's why we talked about neural networks work so well.
I mean, that's such a human thing of that moment of genius of figuring out the intuition of good, essentially.
I mean, we thought that that was...
What is it?
Maybe it's not, right? We thought that about chess, right?
Exactly.
That the ability to see 10, 15, sometimes 20 steps ahead was not a calculation that humans were performing.
It was some kind of weird intuition about different patterns, about board positions, about the relative positions.
Exactly.
Somehow stitching stuff together and a lot of it is just intuition.
But then you have Alpha, I guess, Zero be the first one that did the self play.
It just came up with this. It was able to learn through self play mechanism, this kind of intuition.
Exactly.
But just as you said, it's so fascinating to think whether in the space of totally new ideas, can that be done in developing theorems?
We know it can be done by neural networks because we did it with the neural networks in the craniums of the great mathematicians of humanity, right?
And I'm so glad you brought up Alpha, Zero, because that's the counter example.
It turned out we were flattering ourselves when we said intuition is something different.
It's only humans can do it. It's not the information processing.
If you... If it used to be that way, again, it's very...
It's really instructive, I think, to compare the chess computer, Deep Blue, that beat Kasparov with Alpha, Zero, that beat Lisa Dahl at the go.
Because for Deep Blue, there was no intuition.
There was some pro... Humans had programmed in some intuition.
After humans had played a lot of games, they told the computer, you know, count the pawn as one point, the bishop is three points, the rook is five points, and so on.
You add it all up and then you add some extra points for past pawns and subtract if the opponent has it and blah, blah, blah, blah.
And then what Deep Blue did was just search.
Just very brute force tried many, many moves ahead, all these combinations and a prune tree search, and it could think much faster than Kasparov and it won, right?
And that, I think, inflated our egos in a way it shouldn't have, because people started to say, yeah, yeah, it's just brute force search, but it has no intuition.
Alpha, Zero really popped our bubble there, because what Alpha, Zero does...
Yes, it does also do some of that tree search, but it also has this intuition module, which in GeekSpeak is called a value function, where it just looks at the board and comes up with a number for how good is that position.
The difference was no human told it how good the position is.
It just learned it.
And Mu Zero is the coolest or scariest of all, depending on your mood, because the same basic AI system will learn what the good board position is, regardless of whether it's chess or Go or Shogi or Pacman or Lady Pacman or Breakout or Space Invaders or any number, a bunch of other games.
You don't tell it anything and it gets this intuition after a while for what's good.
So this is very hopeful for science, I think, because if it can get intuition for what's a good position there, maybe it can also get intuition for what are some good directions to go if you're trying to prove something.
I often, one of the most fun things in my science career is when I've been able to prove some theorem about something, and it's very heavily intuition guided, of course. I don't sit and try all random strings. I have a hunch that, you know, this reminds me a little bit about this other proof I've seen for this thing.
So maybe I, first, what if I try this? No, that didn't work out. But this reminds me, actually, the way this failed reminds me of that. So combining the intuition with all these brute force capabilities, I think it's going to be able to help physics too.
Do you think there will be a day when an AI system being the primary contributor, let's say 90% plus wins the Nobel Prize in physics? Obviously, they'll give it to the humans because we humans don't like to give prizes to machines.
It'll give it to the humans behind the system. You could argue that AI has already been involved in some Nobel prizes, probably maybe something with black holes and stuff like that.
Yeah, we don't like giving prizes to other life forms. If someone wins a horse racing contest, they don't give the prize to the horse either.
That's true. But do you think that we might be able to see something like that in our lifetimes when AI? So like the first system, I would say, that makes us think about a Nobel Prize seriously is like Alpha Fold is making us think about in medicine, physiology, a Nobel Prize.
Perhaps discoveries that are direct result of something that's discovered by Alpha Fold. Do you think in physics, we might be able to see that in our lifetimes?
I think what's probably going to happen is more of a blurring of the distinctions. So today, if somebody uses a computer to do a computation that gives them the Nobel Prize, nobody's going to dream of giving the prize to the computer.
Maybe like that was just a tool. I think for these things also, people are just going to for a long time view the computer as a tool. But what's going to change is the ubiquity of machine learning.
I think at some point in my lifetime, finding a human physicist who knows nothing about machine learning is going to be about almost as hard as it is today finding a human physicist who doesn't says, Oh, I don't know anything about computers, or I don't use math.
It would just be a ridiculous concept.
But the thing is, there is a magic moment, though, like with Alpha Zero, when the system surprises us in a way where the best people in the world truly learn something from the system in a way where you feel like it's another entity.
The way people, the way Magnus Carlson, the way certain people are looking at the work of Alpha Zero, it truly is no longer a tool in the sense that it doesn't feel like a tool. It feels like some other entity.
So there is a magic difference where you're like, if an AI system is able to come up with an insight that surprises everybody in some major way that's a phase shift in our understanding of some particular science or some particular aspect of physics,
I feel like that is no longer a tool. And then you can start to say that it perhaps deserves the prize.
So for sure, the more important, the more fundamental transformation of the 21st century science is exactly what you're saying, which is probably everybody will be doing machine learning.
It's to some degree, like if you want to be successful at unlocking the mysteries of science, you should be doing machine learning. But it's just exciting to think about like whether there'll be one that comes along that's super surprising and they'll make a question like who the real inventors are in this world.
Yeah. Yeah, I think the question of isn't if it's going to happen, but when and but it's important also in my mind, the time when that happens is also more or less the same time when we get artificial general intelligence.
And then we have a lot bigger things to worry about than whether it should get the Nobel Prize or not, right? Because when you have machines that can outperform our best scientists at science, they can probably outperform us at a lot of other stuff as well,
which can at a minimum, you know, make them incredibly powerful agents in the world, you know. And I think it's a mistake to think we only have to start worrying about loss of control when machines get to AGI across the board where they can do everything, all our jobs.
Long before that, they'll be hugely influential. We talked at length about how the hacking of our minds with algorithms trying to get us glued to our screens, right, has already had a big impact on society.
There was an incredibly dumb algorithm in the grand scheme of things, right, just supervised machine learning, yet it had had huge impact. So I just don't want us to be lulled into false sense of security and think there won't be any societal impact until things reach human level because it's happening already.
And I was just thinking the other week, you know, when I see some scaremonger going, oh, the robots are coming. The implication is always that they're coming to kill us.
And maybe you should have worried about that if you were in Nagorno Karabakh during the recent war there. But more seriously, the robots are coming right now, but they're mainly not coming to kill us. They're coming to hack us.
They're coming to hack our minds into buying things that maybe we didn't need to vote for people who may not have our best interest in mind. And it's kind of humbling, I think, actually, as a human being to admit that it turns out that our minds are actually much more hackable than we thought.
And the ultimate insult is that we are actually getting hacked by the machine learning algorithms that are in some objective sense much dumber than us, you know. But maybe we shouldn't be so surprised because, you know, how do you feel about the cute puppies?
Love them.
So, you know, you would probably argue that in some across the board measure, you're more intelligent than they are. But boy, our cute puppies good at hacking us, right? Yeah, they move into our house, persuade us to feed them and do all these things.
What do they ever do for us? Yeah, other than being cute and making us feel good, right? So if puppies can hack us, maybe we shouldn't be so surprised if pretty dumb machine learning algorithms can hack us too.
Not to speak of cats, which is another level. And I think we should, to counter your previous point about there, let us not think about evil creatures in this world. We can all agree that cats are as close to objective evil as we can get.
But that's just me saying that. Have you seen the cartoon? I think it's maybe the onion with this incredibly cute kitten. And it just says underneath something that thinks about murder all day. Exactly.
That's accurate. You mentioned offline that there might be a link between post biological AGI and SETI.
So last time we talked, you've talked about this intuition that we humans might be quite unique in our galactic neighborhood, perhaps our galaxy, perhaps the entirety of the observable universe.
You might be the only intelligence civilization here, which is, and you argue pretty well for that thought. So I have a few little questions around this one, the scientific question, in which way would you be, if you were wrong in that intuition,
in which way do you think you would be surprised? Like why were you wrong? We find out that you ended up being wrong. Like in which dimension? So like, is it because we can't see them? Is it because the nature of their intelligence or the nature of their life is totally different than we can possibly imagine?
Is it because the, I mean, something about the great filters and surviving them? Or maybe because we're being protected from signals? All those explanations for why we haven't heard a big loud like red light that says we're here.
Yeah. So there are actually two separate things there that I could be wrong about, two separate claims that I made, right? One of them is, I made the claim, I think most civilizations, going from simple bacteria like things to space colonizing civilizations,
they spend only a very, very tiny fraction of their other life being where we are. That I could be wrong about. The other one I could be wrong about is quite different statement that I think that actually I'm guessing that we are the only
civilization in our observable universe from which light has reached us so far, that's actually gotten far enough to invent telescopes. So let's talk about maybe both of them in turn because they really are different.
The first one, if you look at the n equals one, the data point we have on this planet, right? So we spent four and a half billion years flexing around on this planet with life, right?
We got, and most of it was pretty lame stuff from an intelligence perspective, you know, as bacteria and then the dinosaurs spent, then the things gradually accelerated, right? Then the dinosaurs spent over 100 million years stomping around here without even inventing smartphones.
And then very recently, you know, it's only, we've only spent 400 years going from Newton to us, right? In terms of technology and we've looked at what we've done even, you know, when I was a little kid, there was no internet even.
So it's, I think it's pretty likely for in this case of this planet, right, that we're either going to really get our act together and start spreading life into space the century and doing all sorts of great things or we're going to wipe out.
It's a little hard. If I could be wrong in the sense that maybe what happened on this earth is very atypical. And for some reason, what's more common on other planets is that they spend an enormously long time futzing around with the ham radio and things, but they just never really take it to the next level for reasons I don't have.
I haven't understood and I'm humble and open to that. But I would bet at least 10 to one that our situation is more typical because the whole thing with Moore's law and accelerating technology, it's pretty obvious why it's happening.
Everything that grows exponentially, we call it an explosion, whether it's a population explosion or a nuclear explosion, it's always caused by the same thing. It's that the next step triggers a step after that.
Today's technology enables tomorrow's technology and that enables the next level because the technology is always better, of course, the steps can come faster and faster.
On the other question that I might be wrong about, that's the much more controversial one, I think.
Before we close out on this thing about the first one, if it's true that most civilizations spend only a very short amount of their total time in the stage, say, between inventing telescopes or mastering electricity and doing space travel,
if that's actually generally true, but then that should apply also elsewhere out there. So we should be very, very surprised if we find some random civilization and we happen to catch them exactly in that very, very short stage.
It's much more likely that we find a planet full of bacteria.
Yes. Or that we find some civilization that's already post biological and has done some really cool galactic construction projects in their galaxy.
Would we be able to recognize them, do you think? Is it possible that we just can't? I mean, this post biological world, could it be just existing in some other dimension?
Could it be just all a virtual reality game for them or something? I don't know. That it changes completely where we won't be able to detect?
We have to be, honestly, very humble about this. I think I said earlier the number one principle being scientists is you have to be humble and willing to acknowledge that everything we think, guess, might be totally wrong.
Of course, you could imagine some civilization where they all decide to become Buddhists and very inward looking and just move into their little virtual reality and not disturb the flora and fauna around them and we might not notice them.
But this is a numbers game, right? If you have millions of civilizations out there or billions of them, all it takes is one with a more ambitious mentality that decides, hey, we are going to go out and settle
for a bunch of other solar systems and maybe galaxies. And then it doesn't matter if they're a bunch of quiet Buddhists, we're still going to notice that expansionist one, right?
And it seems like quite the stretch to assume that, you know, we know even in our own galaxy that there are probably a billion or more planets that are pretty Earth like and many of them were formed over a billion years before ours.
So I had a big head start. So if you actually assume also that life happens kind of automatically on an Earth like planet, I think it's pretty quite the stretch to then go and say, okay, so we have other billions of and other billion civilizations out there that also have our level of tech and they all decided to become Buddhists
and not a single one decided to go like go Hitler on the galaxy and say we need to go out and colonize or and or not and not a single one decided for more benevolent reasons to go out and get more resources.
That seems seems like a bit of a stretch, frankly, and this leads into the the second thing you challenge me to be that I might be wrong about how rare or common is life.
You know, so Francis Drake, when he wrote down the Drake equation, multiplied together a huge number of factors, and then we don't know any of them.
So we know even less about what you get when you multiply together the whole product.
Since then, a lot of those factors have become much better known.
One of his big uncertainties was how common is it that a solar system even has a planet.
Right.
Well, now we know a very common Earth like planets.
We know where but our diamond doesn't there are many, many of them even in our galaxy.
At the same time, you know, we have thanks to I'm a big supporter of the set the project and its cousins.
And I think we should keep doing this and we've learned a lot.
We've we've learned that so far, all we have is still unconvincing hints, nothing more.
Right.
And there are certainly many scenarios where it will be dead obvious.
If there were 100 million other human like civilizations in our galaxy, it would not be that hard to notice some of them with today's technology.
And we haven't.
Right.
So so what we can what we can say is, well, OK, we can rule out that there is a human level of civilization on the moon.
And in fact, the many nearby solar systems where we we cannot rule out, of course, that there is something like Earth sitting in a galaxy.
Five billion light years away.
But we've ruled out a lot.
And that's already kind of shocking, given that there are all these planets there, you know, so like, where are they?
Where are they all?
That's the that's the classic Fermi paradox.
Yeah.
And so my argument, which might very wrong, it's very simple, really just goes like this.
OK, we have no clue about this.
It could be the probability of getting life on a random planet that could be 10 to the minus one a priori or 10 to the minus 10, 10 to minus 20, 10 to minus 30, 10 to minus 40.
Basically, every order of magnitude is about equally likely.
When then do the math and ask how close is our nearest neighbor?
It's again equally likely that it's 10 to the 10 meters away, 10 to 20 meters away, 10 to the 30 meters away.
We can we have some nerdy ways of talking about this with Bayesian statistics and a uniform log prior, but that's irrelevant.
This is the simple basic argument.
And now comes the data so we can say, OK, how many were there are all these orders of magnitude 10 to the 26 meters away?
There's the edge of our observable universe.
If it's farther than that light hasn't even reached us yet.
If it's less than 10 to the 16 meters away, well, it's within Earth's rate.
It's no farther away than the sun.
We can definitely rule that out.
So I think about it like this.
A priori, before we looked with telescopes, it could be 10 meters, 10 to the 20, 10 to the 30, 10 to the 40, 10 to the 50, 10 to the blah blah blah.
Equally likely anywhere here.
And now we've ruled out this chunk.
And most of it is outside.
And here is the edge of our observable universe already.
So I'm certainly not saying I don't think there's any life elsewhere in space.
If space is infinite, then you're basically 100% guaranteed that there is.
But the probability that there is life, that the nearest neighbor happens to be in this little region between where we would have seen it already and where we will never see it.
There's actually significantly less than one, I think.
And I think there's a moral lesson from this, which is really important.
Which is to be good stewards of this planet and this shot we've had.
It can be very dangerous to say, oh, it's fine if we nuke our planet or ruin the climate or mess it up with unaligned AI.
Because I know there is this nice Star Trek fleet out there.
They're going to swoop in and take over where we failed.
It wasn't the big deal that the Easter Island losers wiped themselves out.
It's a dangerous way of loading yourself into false sense of security.
If it's actually the case that it might be up to us and only us, the whole future of intelligent life in our observable universe, then I think it really puts a lot of responsibility on our shoulders.
It's a little bit terrifying, but it's also inspiring.
But it's empowering, I think, most of all.
Because the biggest problem today is, I see this even when I teach.
So many people feel that it doesn't matter what they do or we do.
We feel disempowered.
Oh, it makes no difference.
This is about as far from that as you can come up and realize that what we do on our little spinning ball here in our lifetime could make the difference for the entire future of life in our universe.
How empowering is that?
Yeah, survival of consciousness.
A very similar kind of empowering aspect of the Drake equation is, say there is a huge number of intelligent civilizations that spring up everywhere.
But because of the Drake equation, which is the lifetime of a civilization, maybe many of them hit a wall.
And just like you said, it's clear that for us, the great filter, the one possible great filter seems to be coming in the next 100 years.
So it's also empowering to say, okay, well, we have a chance to not.
I mean, the way great filters work, it just gets most of them.
Exactly.
Nick Bostrom has articulated this really beautifully too.
You know, every time yet another search for life on Mars comes back negative or something, I'm like, yes!
Yes!
Our odds for us surviving is the best.
You already made the argument in broad brush there, right?
But just the uncockets, right?
The point is, we already know there is a crap ton of planets out there that are Earth like.
And we also know that most of them do not seem to have anything like our kind of life on them.
So what went wrong?
There's clearly one step along the evolutionary, at least one filter roadblock in going from no life to spacefaring life.
And where is it?
Is it in front of us or is it behind us, right?
If there's no filter behind us and we keep finding all sorts of little mice on Mars and whatever, right?
That's actually very depressing because that makes it much more likely that the filter is in front of us.
And what actually is going on is like the ultimate dark joke that whenever a civilization invents sufficiently powerful tech,
it's just set their clock and then after a while it goes poof for one reason or other and wipes itself out.
Wouldn't that be like utterly depressing if we're actually doomed?
Whereas if it turns out that there is a great filter early on that for whatever reason seems to be really hard to get to the stage of
sexually reproducing organisms or even the first ribosome or whatever, right?
Or maybe you have lots of planets with dinosaurs and cows, but for some reason they tend to get stuck there and never invent smartphones.
All of those are huge boosts for our own odds because being there done that, you know.
It doesn't matter how hard or unlikely it was that we got past that roadlock because we already did.
And then that makes it likely that the filter is in our own hands. We're not doomed.
So that's why I think the fact that life is rare in the universe is not just something that there is some evidence for,
but also something we should actually hope for.
So that's the end, the mortality, the death of human civilization that we've been discussing in life, maybe prospering beyond any kind of great filter.
Do you think about your own death? Does it make you sad that you may not witness some of the...
You lead a research group on working some of the biggest questions in the universe, actually, both on the physics and the AI side.
Does it make you sad that you may not be able to see some of these exciting things come to fruition that we've been talking about?
Of course. Of course it sucks, the fact that I'm going to die. I remember when I was much younger,
my dad made this remark that life is fundamentally tragic and I'm like,
why are you talking about that again?
Many years later, now I feel I totally understand what he means.
We grow up, we're little kids and everything is infinite and it's so cool and then suddenly we find out that actually,
you're going to get game over at some point. So of course it's something that's sad.
Are you afraid?
No, not in the sense that I think anything terrible is going to happen after I die or anything like that.
I think it's really going to be a game over, but it's more that it makes me very acutely aware of what a wonderful gift this is that it gets to be alive right now
and is a steady reminder to just live life to the fullest and really enjoy it because it is finite.
We all get regular reminders when someone near and dear to us dies that one day it's going to be our turn.
It adds this kind of focus. I wonder what it would feel like actually to be an immortal being
if they might even enjoy some of the wonderful things of life a little bit less because there isn't that...
finiteness. Do you think that could be a feature, not a bug, the fact that we beings are finite?
Maybe there's lessons for engineering and artificial intelligence systems as well that are conscious.
Do you think it makes... Is it possible that the reason the pistachio ice cream is delicious is the fact that you're going to die one day
and you will not have all the pistachio ice cream that you could eat because of that fact?
Well, let me say two things. First of all, it's actually quite profound what you're saying.
I do think I appreciate the pistachio ice cream a lot more knowing that there's only a finite number of times I get to enjoy that
and I can only remember a finite number of times in the past.
Moreover, my life is not so long that it just starts to feel like things are repeating themselves in general.
It's so new and fresh.
I also think, though, that death is a little bit overrated in the sense that it comes from an outdated view of physics
and what life actually is because if you ask, okay, what is it that's going to die exactly?
What am I really?
When I say I feel sad about the idea of myself dying, am I really sad that the skin cell here is going to die?
Of course not because it's going to die next week anyway and I'll grow a new one, right?
And it's not any of my cells that I'm associating really with who I really am
nor is it any of my atoms or quarks or electrons.
In fact, basically all of my atoms get replaced on a regular basis, right?
So what is it that's really me from a more modern physics perspective?
It's the information in processing Amy.
That's where my memories, that's my memories, that's my values, my dreams, my passion, my love.
That's what's really fundamentally me and frankly, not all of that will die when my body dies.
Like Richard Feynman, for example, his body died of cancer, you know?
But many of his ideas that he felt made him very him actually live on.
This is my own little personal tribute to Richard Feynman, right?
I try to keep a little bit of him alive in myself.
I've even quoted him today, right?
Yeah, he almost came alive for a brief moment in this conversation.
Yeah, and this honestly gives me some solace.
You know, when I work as a teacher, I feel if I can actually share a bit about myself,
that my students feel worthy enough to copy and adopt a part of things that they know or they believe or aspire to.
Now I live on also a little bit in them, right?
And so being a teacher is a little bit of what I...
That's something also that contributes to making me a little teeny bit less mortal, right?
Because I'm not at least not all going to die all at once, right?
And I find that a beautiful tribute to people we do not respect.
If we can remember them and carry in us the things that we felt was the most awesome about them, right?
Then they live on.
And I'm getting a bit emotional here, but it's a very beautiful idea you bring up there.
I think we should stop this old fashioned materialism and just equate who we are with our quirks and electrons.
There's no scientific basis for that, really.
And it's also very uninspiring.
Now, if you look a little bit towards the future, right?
One thing which really sucks about humans dying is that even though some of their teachings and memories and stories and ethics and so on
will be copied by those around them, hopefully, a lot of it can't be copied and just dies with them, with a brain.
And that really sucks. That's the fundamental reason why we find it so tragic when someone goes from having all this information there to just gone ruined, right?
With more post biological intelligence, that's going to shift a lot, right?
The only reason it's so hard to make a backup of your brain in its entirety is exactly because it wasn't built for that, right?
If you have a future machine intelligence, there's no reason for why it has to die at all if it wants to copy it into some other quirk blob, right?
You can copy not just some of it, but all of it, right?
And so in that sense, you can get immortality because all the information can be copied out of any individual entity.
And it's not just mortality that will change if we get more post biological life.
It's also with that very much the whole individualism we have now, right?
The reason that we make such a big difference between me and you is exactly because we're a little bit limited in how much we can copy.
Like, I would just love to go like this and copy your Russian skills, Russian speaking skills.
Wouldn't it be awesome? But I can't. I have to actually work for years to get better on it.
But if we were robots, just copy and paste freely, then that loses completely. It washes away the sense of what immortality is.
And also individuality a little bit, right? We would start feeling much more
Maybe we would feel much more collaborative with each other if we can just say,
hey, you can give me your Russian and I'll give you whatever. And suddenly you can speak Swedish. Maybe that's a bad trade for you, but whatever else you want from my brain, right?
And there have been a lot of sci fi stories about hive minds and so on where experiences can be more broadly shared.
And I think we don't I don't pretend to know what it would feel like to be a super intelligent machine,
but I'm quite confident that however it feels about mortality and individuality will be very, very different from how it is for us.
Well, for us, mortality and finiteness seems to be pretty important at this particular moment.
And so all good things must come to an end just like this conversation, Max.
I saw that coming.
Sorry, this is the world's worst transition. I could talk to you forever. It's such a huge honor that you've spent time with me.
My honor is mine. Thank you so much for getting me essentially to start this podcast by doing the first conversation,
making me realize falling in love with conversation in itself.
And thank you so much for inspiring so many people in the world with your books, with your research, with your talking and with other
like this ripple effect of friends including Elon and everybody else that you inspire. So thank you so much for talking today.
Thank you. I feel so fortunate that you're doing this podcast and getting so many interesting voices out there into the ether,
and not just the five second sound bites, but so many of the interviews of what you do.
You really let people go into depth in a way which we sorely need in this day and age, and that I got to be number one. I feel super honored.
Yeah, you started it. Thank you so much, Max.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Max Tegmark, and thank you to our sponsors, The Jordan Harbinger Show,
ForSigmatic Mushroom Coffee, BetterHelp Online Therapy, and ExpressVPN.
So the choice is Wisdom, Caffeine, Sanity, or Privacy. Choose wisely, my friends.
And if you wish, click the sponsor links below to get a discount and to support this podcast.
And now let me leave you with some words from Max Tegmark.
If consciousness is the way that information feels when it's processed in certain ways, then it must be substrate independent.
It's only the structure of information processing that matters, not the structure of the matter doing the information processing.
Thank you for listening, and hope to see you next time.